RAPID INTEGRATED ASSESSMENT
CAMBODIA

2016

                             1
              RAPID INTEGRATED ASSESSMENT 足 CAMBODIA SDG PROFILE

Cambodia's GDP is growing at an annual average of 7% contributing to improving the well-being of its citizens.
The country has managed to raise average incomes, reduce poverty, enhance human development, and realize
improvements in income inequality, over the past decade. It has crossed the Lower Middle Income Country
(MIC) threshold in July 2016, and now aims to achieve Upper MIC status by 2030. Although there has been
good progress made during the MDG-era, significant challenges remain, with poverty and vulnerability remaining
a key concern. While the national poverty line reveals that poverty may have been halved from 34% (2008) to
17.7% (2012)1, the Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) suggests that some 33% of Cambodians remain multi-
dimensionally poor, while an additional 21.6% of the population remain vulnerable to slipping back into poverty.2
Environmental sustainability and climate resilience also remain a key challenge.

In late September 2015, Cambodia committed to realizing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the SDGs. The agenda is expected to build on the successes of the MDGs and support Cambodia's transition
from low income to upper middle income country, notably through investment in human development. The
Agenda 2030 is based on three principles:

     Universality: Implies that goals and targets are relevant to all governments and actors. Universality does
         not mean uniformity. It implies differentiation, based on the Common, but Differentiated Responsibilities
         principle. This principle provides the anchoring for the implementation of the SDGs at the national level
         (SDGs localization).

     Integration: Policy integration means balancing all three sustainable development dimensions: social,
         economic, and environmental. An integrated approach implies managing trade-offs and maximizing
         synergies across targets.

     No one left behind: The principle of `no one left behind' advocates for countries to go beyond national
         averages. The SDGs should benefit all 足 eradicating poverty and reducing inequalities. Therefore, the
         promotion and use of disaggregated data is key.

To support Cambodia in its efforts to localize the SDGs, UNDP helped assess the alignment of the country's
national planning documents vis-a-vis the SDGs. UNDP conducted a rapid integrated assessment of
Cambodia's National Strategic Development Plan 2014-2018 and related sector plans and strategies
against the SDG targets. The assessment provides a gap analysis of the SDG targets that are not addressed
in the current plan and related sector strategies, targets that are partially addressed, and targets that have been

1 The World Bank Open Data: http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SI.POV.NAHC?locations=KH. Accessed 13 October,
2016.
2 Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative (OPHI) Country Briefing: Cambodia. June 2016.
http://www.dataforall.org/dashboard/ophi/index.php/mpi/download_brief_files/KHM

                                                                                                                                     2
addressed by multiple sectors. The 24 policy areas assessed are those listed in the National Strategic
Development Plan.3

In addition to the National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP), the assessment drew from the following sector
plans and strategies:

     National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan, 2016
     Cambodia Industrial Development Policy 2015-2025
     Neary Rattanak IV, Five Year Strategic Plan for Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment, 2014-

         2018
     National Policy on Green Growth 2013
     Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014-2023
     Education Strategic Plan 2014-2018
     Draft Health Strategic Plan 2016-2020
     National Social Protection Strategy for the Poor and Vulnerable 2011
     National Disability Strategic Plan 2014-2018
     Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011-2020
     Tourism Development Strategic Plan 2012-2020
     Policy on Labour Migration for Cambodia 2015-2018

The assessment attempted to review current key sector plans and strategies. While the Government is in the
process of developing draft sector strategies for some of the areas, the assessment only took into consideration
the Draft Health Strategic Plan 2014-2018 as the previous plan covered the period 2011-2014 and is no longer
applicable.

As presented in the Resolution A/69/L.85 of the Agenda 2030 for Sustainable Development adopted by the UN
General Assembly in September 2015, the SDGs and their targets are a call to action in the areas of critical
importance to humanity and the planet over the next 15 years. The assessment has grouped the SDGs under
the following categories ("5 Ps"):

3 Good Governance: Fighting Corruption, Legal & Judicial Reforms, Public Administration Reform, Reform of Armed
Forces; Overarching Environment for Implementation of the Strategy: Peace, Political Stability, and Social Order,
Favorable Macro-economic& Financial Condition and Environmental Sustainability, Partnership in Development,
Deepening Cambodia's Integration into the Region and the World; Promotion of Agricultural Sector: Improved
Productivity, Diversification and Commercialization, Promotion of Livestock Farming and Aquaculture, Land Reforms and
clearance of mines and UXO; Sustainable Management of Natural Resources; Physical Infrastructure: Development of
Transport and Urban Infrastructure, Water Resources and Irrigation System Management, Electricity Power
Development, Development of Information and Communication Technology; Private Sector Development &
Employment: Strengthening Private Sector and Promoting Investment & Business, Development of Industry and Small &
Medium Enterprises, Development of Labor Market, Banking & Financial Sector Development; Capacity Building & HR
Development: Strengthening and enhancing Education, Science & Technology and Technical Training, Promotion of
Health and Nutrition, Development of Social Protection System, Enhancing Implementation of Population Policy &
Gender Equity

                                                                                                                                     3
     People: Ending poverty and hunger in all its forms and dimensions, and ensure dignity and equality.
         This theme includes SDG 1 (no poverty); SDG 2 (zero hunger); SDG 3 (good health); SDG 4 (quality
         education); and SDG 5 (gender equality).

     Planet: Protect natural resources and climate of our planet for future generations. This theme includes
         SDG 6 (clean water and sanitation); SDG 12 (sustainable production and consumption); SDG 13
         (climate action); SDG 14 (life below water); and SDG 15 (life on land).

     Prosperity: Ensuring a prosperous and fulfilling life in harmony with nature. This theme includes SDG 7
         (clean and accessible energy); SDG 8 (decent work and economic growth); SDG 9 (industry, innovation,
         and infrastructure); SDG 10 (reduced inequalities); and SDG 11 (sustainable cities and communities).

     Peace: Promoting peaceful, just and inclusive societies. This theme includes SDG 16 (peace, justice
         and strong institutions).

     Partnerships: Implementing the agenda through a strong Global Alliance for Sustainable Development.
         This theme includes SDG 17 (global partnership for the Goals).

The following two templates highlight alignment:
Template 1 provides a quick snapshot of integration/gap analysis and the SDG targets that are addressed by
multiple sectors. For SDG targets addressed by multiple sectors 足 it is expected that joint planning is conducted
or an assessment of impact and potential results be conducted with concerned sectors (to understand if cross-
sectoral interventions are mutually reinforcing).

                                                                                                                                     4
Template 2 provides further details, including targets and corresponding indicators for monitoring that are drawn
from the National Strategic Development Plan, and relevant sector plans and strategies.

Key messages from the assessment:
     There is a good degree of alignment of Cambodia's National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) and
         related sector strategies with the SDG targets. About 79% of the 109 SDG targets reviewed have been
         fully addressed. However, it remains to be seen how these plans have translated into policies that
         emphasize public spending in the areas addressed by the plans. Hence, the next step is to assess the
         degree to which these plans are costed and financed.
     While the assessment points to a good degree of alignment with the SDG targets, there are important
         gaps that are relevant to Cambodia's context, which left unaddressed can roll-back positive
         development gains made during the MDG-era. About 22 SDG targets are either not fully addressed or
         are not addressed at all. Notably, this includes addressing the special needs of vulnerable groups in line
         with Agenda 2030's aim of leaving no one behind (e.g., providing equal and affordable access to public
         services; ensuring social, economic and political inclusion for all groups), tackling unsustainable
         production and consumption (e.g., reducing food losses along production and supply chains); and
         addressing gender inequalities and the needs of youth (e.g., recognizing unpaid care and domestic work
         through the provision of public services, and addressing child labour). These are important gaps for the
         government to consider in the national planning process (including in the MTR).

                                                                                                                                     5
     Meeting the broad goals laid out in the 2030 Agenda would require collaboration and commitment
         across all relevant sectors. The RIA has mapped SDG targets that need to be addressed by multiple
         sectors. For example, the SDG target on achieving universal and equitable access to safe and
         affordable drinking water for all would require collaboration between the Ministry of Industry and
         Handicrafts, the Ministry of Rural Development, Ministry of Economy and Finance, and the National
         Bank of Cambodia. The RIA has also identified some of the missing intra-sectoral linkages, which the
         government would need to consider to effectively meet the 2030 Agenda.

Snapshot of the assessment:

SDG targets fully addressed: 87/109
SDG targets partially addressed: 17/109
SDG targets not addressed: 5/109
SDG targets not applicable: 4 (SDG 10.5, 10.6, 17.2, 17.7)

The assessment took into consideration only 109 SDG targets of the 169 as further information would be needed
to assess alignment with 13 SDG targets that are part of Goal 17 and with the 43 Means of Implementation
SDG targets that fall under SDGs 1 to 16. 4 SDG targets were also not applicable to Cambodia's context as
noted above.

Gap Analysis:

Overall, Cambodia's National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) and/or related sector strategies have fully
prioritized about 79% of the 109 SDG targets reviewed. 82% of the Planet related targets pertaining to SDG 6,
12, 13, 14 and 15 are well addressed with the exception of a few but important gaps (these are discussed in this
report). This highlights the Government's political will and commitment to safeguard the environment and natural
resources and strengthen its response to climate change, which it recognizes as contributing to the country's
economy and sustainable development, including poverty reduction. While the planet related goals are well
addressed in the National plan and sector strategies, the plans also highlight numerous challenges faced by
sectors in advancing the sustainable management of the environment and strengthening the response to climate
change. Environment degradation and climate change are key sources of vulnerability in Cambodia. Given the
dominance of subsistence farming (73% of farms engage in subsistence agriculture), many rural households
depend on the viability of ecosystems including water, soil quality, non-timber forest products, and biodiversity
which are potentially threatened by unsustainable rates of deforestation, the network of dams in the Mekong
River Basin, and climate change. Continued focus in addressing these challenges and effective implementation
of these plans and strategies can yield long-term environmental, social and economic dividend and contribute to
improving the quality of lives of vulnerable communities in Cambodia.

                                                                                                                                     6
About 78% of the people-related SDG targets (SDG 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5) are reflected in the NSDP and relevant
strategies. Given the formidable development challenge related to reducing poverty and improving the
livelihoods of the country's rapidly growing population, the integration of social protection into the National
Strategic Development Plan and the development of a National Social Protection Strategy for the poor and
vulnerable underlines the strong attention of the Government to social protection policy as a way to ensure long-
term socioeconomic development and to respond to crises. While the national poverty line reveals that poverty
has been halved from 34% (2008) to 17.7% (2012), the Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) suggests that
some 33% of Cambodians remain multi-dimensionally poor, while an additional 21.6% of the population remain
vulnerable to slipping back into poverty. Continued focus on protecting the poorest and the most disadvantaged,
mitigating risks that could lead to negative coping strategies and further impoverishment, and building human
capital and expanding opportunities to support the poor in moving out of poverty would help transform poor and
vulnerable communities into a productive force to actively contribute to the socioeconomic development of
Cambodia.

The Government has prioritized Good Governance in its NSDP. About 70% of the peace related SDG targets
(Goal 16) have been addressed in the NSDP, with a focus on fighting corruption; legal and judicial reforms;
public administration reforms (including decentralization and deconcentration); and reform of the armed forces.
Notwithstanding many challenges, the Government is attempting to apply good governance reforms across
sectors, including in the small and medium-enterprises sector, the private sector, the tourism sector and the
health sector. With regard to decentralization and deconcentration, the NSDP notes that whole of government
reforms are complex and require a continuous process of dialogue and consensus-building among policy
makers. Continued focus in this area to enable the transfer of functions from central to local governments is
critical for improving service delivery and local accountability. Gaps concerning the peace related SDG targets
are discussed in the following sections.

On the prosperity related SDG targets (SDG 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11), about 71% have been addressed in the NSDP
and/or the sector plans. Ensuring access to affordable, reliable and modern energy services has been well
addressed. The Government has a high level objective of providing at least 70% of all households with access to
grid quality electricity by the year 2030. The Government recognizes that access, reliability and affordability are
critical drivers to economic growth as well as the need to grow the sector in an environmentally sustainable way.
Most recently it has made a major commitment to reducing the carbon intensity of its energy sector as part of its
Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) released ahead of the UNFCCC COP21 in 2015.4 Under its
INDC, Cambodia proposed a contribution, "conditional upon the availability of support from the international
community", to mitigating greenhouse gases, including a 16% reduction by 2030 on business as usual in its
energy sector. In the area of promoting inclusive and sustainable growth, the NSDP and related sector strategies
well address the targets on achieving higher levels of economic productivity through implementing economic
diversification policies and linking the economy with regional production value chains, and promoting policies
that support productive activities, decent job creation, entrepreneurship, and the formalization and growth of

4 Power Sector Vision: Towards 100% Renewable Electricity by 2050. Greater Mekong Region. Cambodia Report. WWF
2016.

                                                                                                                                     7
small and medium enterprises. The gaps with regard to the prosperity-related targets are discussed in the
following sections.

SDG targets not reflected or partially reflected in the National Strategic Development Plan 2014-2018
(NSDP) and accompanying sector strategies

The assessment found 5 SDG targets that are not addressed in the NSDP and related sector strategies:

     4.7 By 2030, ensure that all learners acquire the knowledge and skills needed to promote
         sustainable development, including, among others, through education for sustainable
         development and sustainable lifestyles, human rights, gender equality, promotion of a culture of
         peace and non-violence, global citizenship and appreciation of cultural diversity and of culture's
         contribution to sustainable development
         The NSDP was prepared well before the SDGs. The inclusion of this SDG target offers an opportunity in
         the future to raise the level of awareness of the people of Cambodia about sustainable development as
         part of its investment in education.

 5.3 Eliminate all harmful practices, such as child, early and forced marriage and female genital
    mutilation
    In Cambodia, about 19% of girls are married before the age of 18.5 As outlined in Cambodia's Gender
    Strategy, child marriage is one of the major challenges to expanding education and training
    opportunities for girls in Cambodia. Special attention needs to be provided in supporting girls,
    particularly the most marginalized and vulnerable, in deferring marriage by advocating that they stay in
    school; supporting initiatives that build their life skills; delivering sexual and reproductive health and HIV
    information and services; and improving their economic and social well-being. Given the recognition of
    the issue in the Gender Strategy of the Royal Government of Cambodia, it is critical that this be
    addressed going forward.

 5.4 Recognize and value unpaid care and domestic work through the provision of public
    services, infrastructure and social protection policies and the promotion of shared responsibility
    within the household and the family as nationally appropriate
    Unpaid care work is a critical--yet largely unseen--dimension of human well-being that provides
    essential domestic services within households, for other households and to community members. Time
    spent by women and girls on domestic chores limits their opportunities to participate in the labor force or
    to engage in economic activity, and entails missed opportunities to attend school. Placing unpaid care
    work at the core of poverty reduction efforts and synergistically working across all three dimensions of
    sustainable development will make a substantial difference to human welfare. In Cambodia, women
    report doing a larger share of unpaid care and domestic work than men: four times more.6

5 The State of the World's Children 2016 Statistical Tables. UNICEF. Data for 2008-2014.
6 UN Women, Progress of the World's Women: Transforming Economies, Realizing Rights. 2015

                                                                                           8
     12.7 Promote public procurement practices that are sustainable, in accordance with national
         policies and priorities
         Sustainable procurement will enable the government to reduce negative environmental impacts and
         improve energy and water efficiency. From an economic perspective, sustainable public procurement
         can generate income, reduce costs and support the transfer of skills and technology. Positive social
         impacts include poverty reduction.

     15.4 By 2030, ensure the conservation of mountain ecosystems, including their biodiversity, in
         order to enhance their capacity to provide benefits that are essential for sustainable
         development
         SDG 15.4 (mountain ecosystems), is neither mentioned explicitly in the NSDP nor in Cambodia's
         National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP). Mountain ecosystems are particularly
         important, in that they maintain rich ecological processes and provide essential goods and services,
         especially water, not only to mountain people, but also to downstream lowlands where demand from
         population centers, agriculture and industry is high. These ecosystems face severe threats from
         unsustainable land use practices (overgrazing and non-conservation agriculture), illegal wood
         extraction, development of large-scale infrastructure (dams, roads) and unsustainable natural resource
         projects (hydrocarbons, mining). Climate change further compounds these threats by increasing levels
         of exposure to droughts, floods (which in turn results in an increase in landslides) and changes in
         seasonality. These impacts both undermine the resilience of the mountain ecosystems and increase the
         vulnerability of the local mountain communities, whose livelihoods and wellbeing depend on their
         services. Mountain people tend to be among the world's poorest and most marginalized populations.
         Not only do many share the disadvantages of rural poverty and ethnic or religious discrimination. They
         also face additional challenges to subsistence brought about by elevation, rough topography and severe
         climate. Cambodia's work on ecosystems and biodiversity may likely also relate to mountain
         ecosystems. This SDG target on mountain ecosystems would be important to consider when developing
         the next NSDP.

The 17 SDG targets listed below are only partially reflected in the NSDP and accompanying sector strategies.
In some cases, the issues are mentioned but specified targets are less ambitious than the SDG targets. In other
cases, the issues are prioritized but without specific policy actions accompanying them. Finally, in other cases,
the issues are mentioned, but the special needs of specific vulnerable groups such as women, children,
people living with disabilities, ethnic minorities are not specifically addressed.

     1.1 By 2030, eradicate extreme poverty for all people everywhere, currently measured as people
         living on less than $1.25 a day.
         The NSDP focuses on poverty as set by the nationally defined poverty line, which is higher than the
         international extreme poverty standards of $1.90 per day. 15.9 percent of Cambodia's population lived

                                                                                                                                     9
         under the nationally defined poverty line in 2015, according to the NSDP, as opposed to 6.2 percent that
         lived with less than $1.90 a day.7 Given that the NSDP sets out to reduce poverty by 1 percent annually,
         it can be expected that extreme poverty will be significantly reduced by 2030, albeit not necessarily
         eradicated. Hence, the target of reducing poverty by 1 percent annually is not ambitious enough.

     1.4 By 2030, ensure that all men and women, in particular the poor and the vulnerable, have
         equal rights to economic resources, as well as access to basic services, ownership and control
         over land and other forms of property, inheritance, natural resources, appropriate new
         technology and financial services, including microfinance
         The NSDP calls for improved capacity to ensure "the effectiveness and efficiency of public services to
         better serve people" and calls for land reform to strengthen the distribution of lands. However, there is
         little emphasis on the poor and vulnerable populations.

         Rural populations, particularly the poor face challenges with regard to access to public services,
         remunerative value chains, and ownership and control over land. With Cambodia's dependence on low-
         skilled, low-value-added sectors, there has been little change in the country's economic structure since
         the past two decades. There has been little development of the micro, small and medium size enterprise
         sector or of agricultural livelihoods, and most farms engage in subsistence agriculture.8 If the resilience
         of the rural poor is to be strengthened and their livelihoods made sustainable, Cambodia's economic
         structure will need to be transformed, through upgrading and an expansion in rural nonfarm
         employment, as part of economic diversification as well as shifting towards higher-value added
         agricultural production.9 On land ownership, the country has seen more than 2m hectares of land
         transferred mostly from subsistence farmers to agribusiness.10 An estimated 400,000 people have been
         affected by land disputes since 2003, creating an underclass of landless citizens.11 The land crisis could
         potentially contribute to long term social upheaval and environmental degradation if not addressed.

         Cambodia's urban poor also face significant challenges. Their vulnerability is exacerbated by
         inadequate provision of and poor access to basic public services, and lack of secure land and house
         tenure. Given that the urban population in Cambodia is about 21 percent12 and urbanization is
         increasing at the rate of 4.4% per year, there will be more pressure on urban social services increasing
         vulnerability among the poor.13

7 World Bank, Poverty and Equity Database
8 UNDP, `Competitiveness and Linkages in Cambodia's Manufacturing Sector', 2014.
9 International Food Policy Research Institute, `From Subsistence to Profit: Transforming Smallholder Farms', July 2013.
10 Conflict over land in Cambodia is taking a dangerous turn. The Guardian. 25 September 2012.
11 Ibid.
12 World Bank Open Data
13 East Asia's Changing Urban Landscape: Measuring a Decade of Spatial Growth. International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development / The World Bank. 2015.

                                                                                                                                   10
     2.2 By 2030, end all forms of malnutrition, including achieving, by 2025, the internationally
         agreed targets on stunting and wasting in children under 5 years of age, and address the
         nutritional needs of adolescent girls, pregnant and lactating women and older persons
         The NSDP sets out very clear targets and actions to improve child and maternal nutrition. However,
         there is no emphasis on the nutritional needs of others, including adolescent girls, pregnant women or
         older persons. According to the World Food Programme, there are currently five million undernourished
         Cambodian citizens.14 Malnutrition in Cambodia is not just about early childhood. More than 3.3 million
         working age adults suffer from anemia and chronic weakness.15 The country has high rates of essential
         vitamins and mineral deficiencies. The poorest part of the population face difficulties in accessing
         adequate quantities of micronutrients, particularly in food insecure, rural areas where access to proper
         water and sanitation as well as health care is scant. A study by Cambodia's Council for Agricultural and
         Rural Development (CARD), WFP and UNICEF reveals that malnutrition in Cambodia costs between
         US$250 million and US$400 million annually or 1.5% to 2.5% of the country's total annual Gross
         Domestic Product.16 If malnutrition continues to weaken economic activity at 1.5-2.5% of GDP,
         Cambodia's ambitious national objective of 7% annual GDP growth will be more difficult to achieve and
         sustain.

     6.2 By 2030, achieve access to adequate and equitable sanitation and hygiene for all and end
         open defecation, paying special attention to the needs of women and girls and those in
         vulnerable situations
         Although there is an indicator in the NSDP to track access of the urban population to improved
         sanitation, the document does not include specific targets/action to improve access. The NSDP focuses
         only on improving access to sanitation in rural communities. While 75% of the rural population use
         unimproved sanitation facilities and improving their access is paramount, attention may also need to be
         paid to improving access for the 18% of the urban population that use unimproved sanitation facilities.17
         Furthermore, rapid urbanization can outpace service provision, further increasing the number of urban
         dwellers without access to adequate sanitation.

     6.4 By 2030, substantially increase water-use efficiency across all sectors and ensure
         sustainable withdrawals and supply of freshwater to address water scarcity and substantially
         reduce the number of people suffering from water scarcity
         The NSDP focuses only on the Agricultural sector in relation to addressing the target on increasing
         water-use efficiency. The Cambodia Industrial Development Policy 2015-2025 makes a reference to the
         preparation of urban/city development plans that take into consideration the sustainable management of
         environmental resources (page 21). However, details are lacking so it is difficult to determine if the issue

14 Malnutrition in Cambodia: The Hidden Problem That Costs Up to US$400 Million Annually. WFP, 2014.
15 The Economic Consequences of Malnutrition in Cambodia: A Damage Assessment Report. CARD, UNICEF & WFP, 2014.
16 The Economic Consequences of Malnutrition in Cambodia: A Damage Assessment Report. CARD, UNICEF & WFP, 2014.
17 World Health Organization and UNICEF, Progress on Drinking Water and Sanitation. 2014.

                                                                                                                                   11
    of water-use efficiency is addressed by this sector. The other sectoral plans reviewed do not address
    this target.

 8.5 By 2030, achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all women and men,
    including for young people and persons with disabilities, and equal pay for work of equal value
    Job creation is a clear priority in the NSDP, including for youth and people living with disabilities.
    However, decent work for all women and men is not addressed in the NSDP. Job stability and security
    are key indicators of progress toward decent work. In Cambodia, about 64.1% of workers remain in
    vulnerable employment18, in jobs that typically lack formal work arrangements which would include
    continuity of income necessary for decent living standards and insulation against external shocks. As a
    consequence of persistent gender inequalities with regard to women's access to decent work, women
    are overrepresented among vulnerable workers.19 While no official data are available, precarious work
    (i.e. work that is casual, short term, seasonal or temporary) 足 is also likely to be widespread, particularly
    in view of the continued dominance of agriculture.20

    The issue of equal pay and equal value is also not addressed in either the NSDP or the Gender Equality
    and Women's Empowerment Plan (2014-2018). Ensuring that the work done by women and men is
    valued fairly, and ending pay discrimination, is essential to achieving gender equality and a core
    component of decent work. Addressing gender pay differentials makes it less likely that low-income
    households, including those headed by women, become poor or remain poor. While there are provisions
    under Cambodia's constitution stipulating that Khmer citizens of either sex shall receive equal pay for
    equal work (Article 36), in practice most women receive lower wages than their male counterparts.
    According to a recent ILO report the earnings gap between young Cambodian women and men was 35
    percent, the fourth-highest of the 23 countries surveyed by the ILO for that measure.

 8.7 Take immediate and effective measures to eradicate forced labour, end modern slavery and
    human trafficking and secure the prohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child labour,
    including recruitment and use of child soldiers, and by 2025 end child labour in all its forms
    Fighting against human trafficking is prominently featured in the NSDP. However, there is no mention of
    forced labour or child labour. Cambodia has an estimated 1.5 million orphans and vulnerable children,
    and up to 20,000 of them living or working on the streets of Phnom Penh.21 An ILO report reveals a
    worrying increase in hazardous child labour among all age-groups of children (5 to 17 years old).22 This
    includes risky occupations such as scavenging, quarrying and mining, fishing as well as jobs with
    excessively long hours.

18 World Bank Open Data
19 Decent Work Country Profile: Cambodia, International Labour Organization 2012.
20 Ibid.
21 UNICEF, Child Protection, 2011
22 Decent Work Country Profile: Cambodia, International Labour Organization 2012.

                                                                                   12
     9.1 Develop quality, reliable, sustainable and resilient infrastructure, including regional and
         transborder infrastructure, to support economic development and human well-being, with a
         focus on affordable and equitable access for all
         Increasing investment in physical infrastructure is a clear priority of the NSDP. However, the document
         does not address affordable and equitable access for all. Affordable and equitable access to physical
         infrastructure is critical to achieving sustainable development and empowering communities. Growth in
         productivity and incomes, and improvements in health and education outcomes require access to
         affordable and equitable infrastructure. For instance, transportation infrastructure-- such as roads and
         railways--is key for people's mobility from home to work, and for connecting rural areas to domestic and
         regional markets, contributing to a country's economic development. Sustainable water infrastructure
         can improve people's lives by providing access to clean water and help managing scarce resources in a
         sustainable manner. In Cambodia, about 31% of the rural population do not have access to improved
         sources of drinking water. 23 The country still lacks the infrastructure required for the energy sector to
         match the pace of development. While the number of people with access to electricity doubled between
         2002 and 2011,24 the proportion is still low: less than half of Cambodian households had access to
         electricity in 2013.25

     10.2 By 2030, empower and promote the social, economic and political inclusion of all,
         irrespective of age, sex, disability, race, ethnicity, origin, religion or economic or other status
         While social, economic and political inclusion is featured for women and people living with disabilities,
         there is no emphasis on race, ethnicity, religion and other status. Cambodia became a party to the
         Convention on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination in 1983, highlighting the commitment of the
         Royal Government to take all measures set out in the Convention to ensure that nobody experiences
         discrimination in Cambodia on the basis of their race or ethnic origin.26 The Convention is guaranteed in
         Cambodian law by article 31 of the Constitution. To enable progress on the SDGs and the achievement
         of Cambodia's national development goals, the Government would need to consider inclusion of all
         minority groups in Cambodia when developing their next NSDP.

     10.4 Adopt policies, especially fiscal, wage and social protection policies, and progressively
         achieve greater equality
         While there is a strong emphasis on social protection policies to promote greater equality, there are no
         actions associated with adopting of fiscal or wage policies for greater equality.

     11.2 By 2030, provide access to safe, affordable, accessible and sustainable transport systems
         for all, improving road safety, notably by expanding public transport, with special attention to the

23 WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP) for Water Supply and Sanitation. Cambodia: estimates on the use of
water sources and sanitation facilities (1980 - 2015).
24 International Energy Agency (IEA). Southeast Asia Energy Outlook. France: IEA/ OECD, September 2013.
25 Electricity Authority of Cambodia. "Report on power sector of The Kingdom of Cambodia: 2014 edition."
26 UNHCR: http://cambodia.ohchr.org/en/treaty-block-sidebar-left/cambodia-and-convention-elimination-racial-
discrimination. Accessed 01 October 2016.

                                                                                                                                   13
    needs of those in vulnerable situations, women, children, persons with disabilities and older
    persons
    The extension of transport infrastructure is a clear priority in the NSDP, particularly to rural areas.
    However, there is no mention of addressing the needs of those in vulnerable situations.

 11.6 By 2030, reduce the adverse per capita environmental impact of cities, including by paying
    special attention to air quality and municipal and other waste management
    The NSDP specifies no actions to address issues of air quality in cities. With rapid economic growth and
    urbanization, cities in Cambodia are experiencing increasing levels of air pollution. Rising level of air
    borne pollution is extracting greater social and economic costs leading to the premature deaths of
    people each year.

 12.3 By 2030, halve per capita global food waste at the retail and consumer levels and reduce
    food losses along production and supply chains, including post-harvest losses
    The NSDP notes that research and development on post-harvest processing technology and
    management are still at a nascent stage. The targets in the NSDP also do not address reducing food
    waste at the consumer level. Hunger is still one of the most urgent development challenges. With 14.2%
    of the population in Cambodia undernourished27, it will be important for the Government to consider this
    target in their next planning cycle.

 14.6 By 2020, prohibit certain forms of fisheries subsidies which contribute to overcapacity and
    overfishing, eliminate subsidies that contribute to illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
    and refrain from introducing new such subsidies, recognizing that appropriate and effective
    special and differential treatment for developing and least developed countries should be an
    integral part of the World Trade Organization fisheries subsidies negotiation
    The NSDP makes no reference to addressing this particular SDG target. While the elimination of certain
    forms of fisheries subsidies is not explicitly mentioned in the NBSAP, the document does refer more
    broadly to the elimination, phasing out or reform of harmful subsidies to promote the conservation and
    sustainable use of biodiversity and environmentally responsible behavior.

 16.4 By 2030, significantly reduce illicit financial and arms flows, strengthen the recovery and
    return of stolen assets and combat all forms of organized crime
    Although the NSDP does address the issue of illicit financial flows, there is no mention of reducing arms
    flows as well as strengthening the recovery and return of stolen assets. Gun violence fuelled by illicit
    weapons destroys communities, economic stability and the rule of law; it destabilizes legitimate
    governments and extinguishes any hope of eliminating poverty for people living in violence-prone areas.
    The Government would need to address this target, if these issues are deemed to be relevant to
    Cambodia's context.

27 Millennium Development Goals Indicators Database: http://mdgs.un.org/unsd/mdg/Data.aspx

                                                                                            14
     16.7 Ensure responsive, inclusive, participatory and representative decision-making at all levels
         While, there are multiple targets on gender in the NSDP that address this SDG target, targets on
         inclusion and participation of other marginalized groups in decision-making (for e.g. people with
         disabilities, youth, and indigenous peoples) are missing. To enable progress on the SDGs and the
         achievement of Cambodia's national development goals, the Government would need to consider
         inclusion of all marginalized groups in Cambodia when developing their next NSDP.

     16.9 By 2030, provide legal identity for all, including birth registration
         The NSDP includes a target on civil registration. While civil registration provides the basis for legal
         identity, it is not sufficient. For instance, a birth certificate is not always the core document necessary to
         establish citizenship, claim rights, and access various services. In many countries, a national identity
         card, rather than a birth certificate, is the required document to access many services and exercise
         rights. Furthermore, a birth registration measure will exclude children and adults who are past the point
         for birth registration but may still lack legal identity and/or legal documentation. Based on Cambodia's
         context, this may need to be looked into.

Means of Implementation:
SDG 17 targets will need to be looked into more carefully on areas related to finance (ODA and domestic
resources), capacity-building, and data, monitoring and accountability issues.

Cross-sectoral linkages:
The assessment identifies various cross-sectoral linkages (see image below) and these have been detailed in
template 2. It may be good to discuss whether there is collaboration between these sectors in their planning and
implementation of actions and how their interventions complement each other's plan.

                                                                                                                                   15
The assessment has also identified key missing inter-sectoral linkages. For instance, SDGs 11.5, 11.6 and 11.7
related to making cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable may also need to be
addressed by the Environment sector. Currently, these targets are addressed by other sectors, including
infrastructure. There may be additional linkages that would need to be identified for effective SDG
implementation and this is an area for further follow-up.

Responding to the integrated nature of Agenda 2030 and the SDGs, it would also be important to look into the
most effective institutional architecture to promote cross-sectoral collaboration throughout the development

                                                                                                                                   16
planning cycle - from situation assessment to prioritization, implementation of programmes and interventions,
monitoring and evaluation, building on the national experience with the implementation of the NSDP and related
sectoral plans and strategies. The NSDP highlights the need for strengthening coordination across government
agencies both at the national and sub-national level, including coordination with all stakeholders.

Reflections:
The following are key reflections from conducting the assessment:

     It is important to note that the reviewed national strategies have a much shorter timeframe than the SDG
         Agenda. The NSDP and most sectoral strategies set out policy priorities and action for the period 2014-
         2018. Thus, many of the objectives, goals and targets set out in these strategies, are less ambitious
         than those set out in the SDG Agenda. However, this analysis considers that if these issues remain a
         priority in subsequent national strategies and trends of progress are maintained the SDG targets will be
         achieved by 2030. As an example, the draft Health Strategic Plan has as an objective to reduce
         maternal mortality ratio to from 170 per 100,000 live births in 2014 to 130 by 2020. To achieve this goal
         maternal mortality will have to be reduced by approximately 5 percent per year until 2020. If this trend
         continues until 2030, the corresponding SDG target 3.1, which calls for reducing the maternal mortality
         ratio to 70 per 100,000 live births by 2030, could be achieved.

     Many of the areas listed in the NSDP as well as in some of the sector strategies lack measureable
         targets/indicators, so the team had to resort to a subjective assessment.

     The RIA is an initial step in assessing the degree to which Cambodia's plans align with the SDGs. The
         analysis highlights key policy gaps and opportunities. The next step is to build on the initial analysis and
         assess in-depth the degree to which plans are costed and financed.

                                                                                                                                   17
