                                                 REPUBLIC OF NAMIBIA

strategicPLAN

              2012 ­ 2017

                                MINISTRY OF EDUCATION

                                                                                   STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017 i
ii STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017
TABLE OF
                 CONTENT

FOREWORD .......................................................................................................................................... iv
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT ........................................................................................................................ vi
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ..................................................................................................................... viii
1. INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................................... 1

         1.1 Introduction and Background ........................................................................................ 1
         1.2 Rationale for the Strategic Plan .................................................................................... 3
         1.3 Linkage between Strategic Plan and Performance Management Plan (PMP) ............. 4
2. STRATEGIC DIRECTION .......................................................................................................... 5
         2.1 Conceptual Framework
         2.2 Mandate ........................................................................................................................ 5
         2.3 Vision Statement ........................................................................................................... 6
         2.4 Mission Statement ........................................................................................................ 6
         2.5 Core Values .................................................................................................................. 7
3. CONCEPTUAL UNDERSTANDING, STRATEGIC THEMES AND OBJECTIVES ................... 8
         3.1 Strategic Themes .......................................................................................................... 8
         3.2 Strategic Theme and Objectives ................................................................................... 9
4. STRATEGY MAP ..................................................................................................................... 10
5. STRATEGIC PLAN-MATRIX .................................................................................................... 11

                                                                                     STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017 iii
  FOREWORD

                   The Strategic Plan of the Ministry of

                                                                  Education provides the strategic direction and
                                                                  frameworks during the period namely, 2012 ­ 2017
                                                                  in order to achieve the Ministry's vision, mission
                                                                  and strategic objectives.

                                                                  This blueprint articulates the Ministry's strategies,
                                                                  processes and evidence-based reporting of results in
                                                                  the education and training sector. The ultimate goal
                                                                  is the actualization of the Ministry`s goals of access,
                                                                  equity, democracy and quality education for all.

       The five strategic themes developed by the Ministry and corresponding strategic objectives and initiatives
       form the basis of the Strategic Plan, and should assist the Ministry to attain its vision and mission.

       The Namibian educational system requires continuous improvement in quality teaching and learning
       outcomes. The entire staff of the Ministry of Education from the classroom to the top management
       must, therefore, be always conscious that their performances influence the delivery of quality educational
       services and positive learner academic achievements.

       We set high standards in this Plan for positive learning outcomes leading to diverse opportunities for
       our learners regarding their careers and success in life. Our Strategic Plan identifies strategic objectives,
       initiatives and measureable results that demonstrate the expected outcomes of the education system
       over the next five years. Monitoring and evaluation therefore becomes an integral part of each and every
       component of the plan.

       We are conscious that it will not be easy to achieve the Strategic objectives and the collective outcomes
       of education and training excellence that we articulated in our Vision Statement. We further recognize that
       the education and training sector in Namibia is likely to face many challenges in the implementation of

iv STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017
the Plan, and it is critical therefore, that all the stakeholders in education and training join forces with the
Ministry in the pursuit of excellence and in fulfilling the mandate of the Ministry. This is envisaged through
our commitment to stakeholder partnerships, whereby development partner participation through ETSIP
implementation has been elaborated.
The key performance indicators (KPIs), initiatives and timeframe for achieving the strategic themes/
objectives were formulated, and responsibilities assigned to relevant units in order to ensure the effective
implementation of the Strategic Plan. Mechanisms were also put in place to monitor progress in achieving
the strategic themes and objectives. We are confident that the Performance Management Plan (PMP), as
a tool, would ensure the implementation process and reporting of results in a timely manner.
In conclusion, the Ministry of Education will continue to strive for the provision of quality teaching and
learning, improved learning outcomes, and the production of an educated and skilled workforce needed
for a productive and competitive Nation through the effective implementation of this Strategic Plan.

DR. ABRAHAM IYAMBO
MINISTER OF EDUCATION

                                                                                       STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017 v
  ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

                   The Strategic Plan of the Ministry

                                                                  of Education for the period 2012 ­ 2017 is a
                                                                  culmination of the collective wisdom of the Ministry
                                                                  and its stakeholders. The Ministry acknowledges
                                                                  the participation and valuable contributions, which
                                                                  were made by all the staff members of the Ministry
                                                                  of Education and stakeholders, both local and
                                                                  international, in the education and training sector
                                                                  during the development stage of the Strategic
                                                                  Plan, including the consultative stakeholders'
                                                                  meetings across the regions.
       The guidance, active involvement and technical support from the Office of the Prime Minister and the
       Ministerial Implementation Team during the development of the Strategic Plan were invaluable, and
       are highly appreciated. This Plan could not have been completed without the active involvement and
       immeasurable support of individuals and groups, thus, we express our sincere appreciation to all.

       ALFRED MATENGU ILUKENA
       PERMANENT SECRETARY

vi STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017
ABBREVIATIONS

AIDS     - Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome
AUPE     - Adult Upper Primary Education
CLDC     -  Community Learning and Development Centre
DAE      -  Directorate of Adult Education
DNEA     -  Directorate of National Examination and Assessment
DPS      -  Deputy Permanent Secretary
EMIS     -  Education Management Information Services
ETSIP    -  Education and Training Sector Improvement Programme
FE       -  Formal Education
HAMU     -  HIV & Aids Management Unit
HIV      - Human Immuno-deficiency Virus
HR       -  Human Resources
ICT      - Information and Communication Technology
IT       -  Information Technology
KPI      - Key Performance Indicators
LL       -  Lifelong Learning
MIT      - Ministerial Implementation Team
MoE      - Ministry of Education
NCHE     - National Council for Higher Education
NDPs     - National Development Plans
NESE     - National External School Evaluation
NIED     -  National Institute for Education Development
NLAS     -  Namibia Library and Archives Services
NLP      - National Literacy Programme
NSFAF    -  Namibia Student Financial Assistant Fund
O/M/A's  - Offices/Ministries/Agencies
PA       - Performance Agreement
PAD      -  Planning and Development
PESTLE   -  Political, Economical, Sociological, Technological, Legal and Environmental Factors
PMS      - Performance Management System
PQA      -  Programmes Quality Assurance
RC       - Regional Council
SATS     - Standardized Achievement Tests
SLA's    - Service Level Agreements
SOE's    - State Owned Enterprises
SWOT     - Strength, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats

               STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017 vii
  EXECUTIVE
                   SUMMARY

  This Strategic Plan provides an implementation framework and identifies the strategic

       interventions and levers necessary to improve the education system. It provides an opportunity and
       challenge to chart a path that recognizes the education system as the key engine driver and contributor
       to the development of the Namibian society.

       This Strategic Plan serves as the centre around which all other activities revolve, and at the same time
       provides direction to the different units within the Ministry of Education. It provides the important link
       between the Ministry of Education and other high level commitments such as Vision 2030, NDPs, the
       Education Act of 2001 and other relevant policies and documents. This Strategic Plan was developed
       in line with the Performance Management System (PMS) process in order to ensure alignment to Vision
       2030, NDPs and other high level documents. The Strategic Plan is the first milestone in the Performance
       Management System.

       An overview of the Strategic Plan is presented below:-

       · Chapter 1 Introduction and background provide a brief overview of the historical evolution of the
                            Ministry of Education and the reform initiatives, which serve as the foundation of the
                            Strategic Plan 2012-2017. Chapter 1 further illustrates the rationale of the Strategic
                            Plan and the process used in developing the Plan.

       · Chapter 2 High level statements provide the linkage with the following key elements namely, the
                            Mandate which is to educate and train for national development; Vision Statement
                            which is to be the ministry of excellence in providing quality education and training
                            for National Development. The Mission Statement which is to provide accessible
                            and equitable quality education and training for a skilled, productive and competitive
                            Nation, and the Core Values constitute; Integrity, Accountability, Commitment,
                            Respect and Empathy, Teamwork and Professionalism. The above mentioned were
                            derived from key national documents, the situational analyses, stakeholder analysis
                            and strategic issues identified during the planning process.

viiiSTRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017
· Chapter 3 Five strategic themes were identified as pillars of excellence or key focus areas such
                     as; Teaching and Learning, Leadership and management, Infrastructure, Regulatory
                     framework and Stakeholder Relation during the five year period. The strategic themes
                     will be operationalized through 19 strategic objectives that describe the desired
                     results to be achieved in order to realize the Ministry of Education's vision and to fulfill
                     its mission.

· Chapter 4 Strategy Map provides a framework that exhibits the entire Strategic Plan on one
                     page. It shows the hypothesized cause-effect relationship between the strategic
                     objectives. It indicates how the strategic objectives support each other to achieve the
                     Ministry of Education's Vision, and to fulfill the Mission, which would result in satisfying
                     the stakeholders' needs and expectations.

· Chapter 5 Strategic Plan Matrix indicates the accountability framework that provides the link
                     between the strategic theme, strategic objectives, key performance indicators, annual
                     targets and the financial requirements to achieve the stated initiative.

                                                                                     STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017 ix
x STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017
INTRODUCTION

1.1 Introduction and Background

         The Ministry of Education was established mainly to provide education and training for national
         development. Inspired and guided by our National Vision Statement--Vision 2030, Namibia had
         to undergo a dramatic reform of its overall national development strategy. Vision 2030 sets a very
         ambitious target that, by 2030, Namibia should join the ranks of high income countries and afford
         all its citizens a quality of life that is comparable to that of the developed world. With emphasis on
         enhanced quality of life for all, Vision 2030 calls for rapid economic growth to be accompanied
         by equitable social development. These twin goals of growth with equity are to be pursued within
         a broader strategic framework of transforming the economy into a knowledge-based economy.

         The NDP, which embodies the goals of Vision 2030, sets out the macroeconomic growth targets
         and emphasizes the role of private sector as an engine of growth. Within the context of Vision
         2030, the NDP4 identifies the key four focus areas, such as the national Human Resources
         Planning and Development, Job Creation and reduction of unemployment rate from 44.5% to
         40.4%, Reduction of inequality of income as measured by Gini-Coefficient Index to 0.47 from
         0.7, and increased size of manufacturing and service sectors by diversifying Namibian economy,
         leading towards achieving to increased per capita income to the level of developed high income
         countries. These factors have been incorporated in the development of Strategic Plan's high
         level statements, strategic themes and objectives. The Mandate of the Ministry clearly states "to
         educate and train for national development" and its essence is captured in several of the strategic
         objectives, initiatives and key performance indicators to achieve during the next five years. The
         Strategic Plan focuses on "providing accessible and equitable quality education and training for a
         skilled productive and competitive Nation" as the Ministry's Mission. The Strategic Plan objectives
         and initiatives are designed to achieve higher passing rates at the primary and secondary schools
         so that nation's workforce needs and skill-can be met and achieve a knowledge-based economy.

         Therefore, a strategic plan for the education sector was developed to reform the Sector in order to
         contribute to the actualization of Vision 2030 and the attainment of national development goals as
         set out in the NDPs. Eduction and Training Sector Pimprovement Programme (ETSIP) represents

                                                                                       STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017 1
                the education and training sector's response to the call of Vision 2030. Its key purpose is to
                substantially enhance the sector's contribution to the attainment of strategic national development
                goals, and to facilitate the transition to a knowledge based economy. In the immediate future, it
                will improve the quality of education and skilled workforce required to improve knowledge-driven
                productivity and growth, and thus contribute to economic growth.

                All key stakeholders in the education sector have been assigned unique and key roles towards the
                implementation of the ETSIP document of which the Ministry of Education is not an exception. The
                Ministry opted to develop a Strategic Plan to harmonise various planning and strategic documents
                into one plan, which will inform the education Chapter of NDP4. Therefore the Strategic Plan is
                an internal document that outlines the Ministry's strategy, direction, purpose, strategic themes,
                strategic objectives, strategic initiatives and making decisions on allocating its resources to
                pursue this strategy. The Strategic Plan was developed based on Vision 2030, ETSIP, situational
                analysis conducted and other high level documents. The aim of the strategic plan is to contribute
                to the overall attainment of Vision 2030 in an evolving and dynamic environment. The strategic
                thinking and planning benefitted from an intensive and broad based consultative process, which
                included diverse actors such as; the key partners (stakeholders) and staff members. The process
                began with the review of the relevant legislative and policy documents so as to have a shared and
                common understanding of the Ministry's mandate. Having understood the Ministry's Mandate,
                this was followed by a rigorous SWOT & PESTLE analysis and stakeholder analysis, so as
                to scan the internal and external environment, identify the needs and expectations of the key
                stakeholders and the strategic issues as part of the situational analysis.

                One of the strategic themes of the Strategic Plan is strengthening the stakeholder relations and
                partnerships. With the key strategic objective of Maximizing benefits from strategic partnerships.
                ETSIPbeing the improvement programme, we pay special attention to implementing and monitoring
                the initiatives pertaining to its key focus areas. In the second phase of the ETSIP, several key
                performance indicators will be identified as part of the Strategic Plan and subsequently in the
                Performance Management Plans (PMPs) at the directorate or sector levels. Special attention
                will focus on the use of ETSIP resources, a significant part of which comes from development
                partners. Efficient and effective use of resources resulting in increased outcome of teachers
                and learners to be measured through key performance indicators is a challenge to programme
                operators at the headquarters directorates, regions and school levels.

                Using the information derived from the exercises, the old vision and mission statements and core
                values of the MoE were revised. These high level statements give direction to where the Ministry

2 STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017
         wants to be in five years. To support the high level statements, five strategic themes have been
         identified as the key focus areas (pillars of excellence) during the Strategic Plan implementation
         period. Objectives have been developed to facilitate the implementation of each strategic theme.
         The strategic objectives describe the desired results that must be achieved to realize the Vision
         and the Mandate. A strategy map had been also developed that links the key elements of the
         Strategic Plan. This map provides a bird's eye view on how the MoE will achieve such strategic
         objectives. Key performance indicators and targets have been developed to facilitate a continuous
         process of monitoring the progress of the implementation of the Strategic Plan. Initiatives have
         been identified and costed, and units were assigned with responsibilities to meet the strategic
         objectives and the set targets.

1.2 Rationale for the Strategic Plan

         A Strategic Plan is a very crucial document, which will propel the Ministry of Education to live-up to
         its Mandate and achieve its Vision. The Strategic Plan is a means to success when implemented
         successfully. It enables the Ministry to formulate better strategies through the use of a more
         systematic, logical and rational approach to strategic choices. The Plan allows the Ministry to
         initiate and influence activities, and thus to exert control over its own destiny. It is worth stating
         that the Strategic Plan uniquely embraces a ministerial and sector wide approach in the definition
         of its themes, strategic objectives, KPI, target and initiatives.

         It stipulates the key performance indicators and targets to be met within specified time-frames
         as well as strategic initiatives to be implemented in order to meet the set targets and achieve
         the strategic objectives. Furthermore, it provides the amount of resources required to implement
         the strategic initiatives and the entire Strategic Plan. It further makes it easier for the Ministry of
         Education to assess the Ministry's performance, and confirm that progress is occuring against
         defined direction.

         It also serves as a foundation for the implementation of the Performance Management System
         (PMS). The Strategic Plan is the basis for Performance Agreements (PAs), benchmarked at
         individual staff member level, thereby translating the strategy into desired outcomes for the entire
         Ministry. In addition, this integrated Strategic Plan unifies the Ministry around a shared vision and
         guides decisions in the allocation of scarce resources.

                                                                                       STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017 3
                It further clarifies the Mandate and Mission of the Ministry of Education, and making it easy for
                the employees to understand what is expected from them. This Plan is designed to empower
                staff members to be more pro-active in shaping the future of the education system, and build a
                strong teamwork. It is also intended to strengthen the utilization of expertise within the Ministry
                and maximise benefits from partnerships. It would also improve communication and coordination
                of activities, thus reducing duplication of efforts in the Ministry.

     1.3 Linkage between Strategic Plan and
      Performance Management Plan (PMP)

                The high level statements, such as the Ministry's Mandate, Vision, Mission, and core values
                identified by the Ministry's Strategic Plan have been incorporated into the Ministry's Performance
                Management Plan (PMP). The Strategic Themes and Strategic Objectives form the foundation for
                developing Key Performance Indicators for PMPs at the unit levels.

                The strategic theme/objective level indicators measure country-level progress in each of the
                strategic objective areas that are laid out in the Strategic Plan Framework. The PMP lists not
                only all the indicators included in the Ministry's Strategic Plan but also indicators at the detailed
                and disaggregated levels to account for regional variations, gender equity, social, economic and
                geographic differences, and learning outcomes by grades within primary and secondary schools,
                that are of interest to management at the unit levels. Thus, the PMPs at the headquarters
                directorate, regional and school level serve as a comprehensive operational or tactical plan to
                monitor the program activities and report evidence-based results on a continuous basis. The
                results achieved through PMP will not only address at the initiative, strategic objective and theme
                levels required by the Strategic Plan but also on detailed program activity levels so needed by
                operating units at the directorate, region and school levels.

                At the lowest level are the key performance indicators, which are a combination of input, process,
                output and outcome indicators. These standard indicators measure the direct, intended results
                expected from MoE - supported programs, projects and activities. Program level key performance
                indicators are directly attributable to MoE support as well as those of development partner
                assistance ­ training, technical, commodity and financial support.

4 STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017
STRATEGIC
               DIRECTION

2.1 Conceptual Framework

   TERMS/CONCEPTS                                            DEFINITION
Access
Quality                The importance of having the right to participate in an educational programme.
Relevance
                       The focus is on learning which strengthens the capacities of learners to act
Reasonable Facilities  progressively on their own through the acquisition of relevant knowledge, useful
                       skills and appropriate attitudes.
Excellence
                       Relevance can best be defined as the degree to which a resource or activity matches
                       an end user's needs. The closer the match, the greater the potential value.

                       Reasonable facilities help to alleviate a substantial disadvantage for example,
                       inaccessible buildings, transport or websites and poor communication or service
                       facilities. Reasonable facilities are put in place to help reduce these barriers in order
                       to provide equality of access and opportunity for all.

                       Excellence is a quality of being, a virtue, superior accomplishment or achievement,
                       outstanding value. 

2.2  Mandate

         The Mandate prescribes the core service area in which the Ministry of Education has to perform.
         In other words, it specifies the core functions and responsibilities of the Ministry of Education
         to the stakeholders and beneficiaries. The Ministry of Education's Mandate is derived from the
         Namibian Constitution, Article 20 and all relevant acts such as the Education Act (Act No. 16 of
         2001), Vocational Education Act (Act No. 1 of 2008), Namibia Library and Information Srvice Act
         (Act No. 4 of 2000) and Archives Act (Act No. 12 of 1992).

                                  To educate and train for national development

         According to Article 20 of the Namibian Constitution
         (1) All persons shall have the right to education.
         (2) Primary education shall be compulsory and the State shall provide reasonable facilities

                  to render effective this right for every resident within Namibia, by establishing and
                  maintaining State schools at which primary education will be provided free of charge.

                          STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017 5
                (3) Children shall not be allowed to leave school until they have completed their primary
                         education or have attained the age of sixteen (16) years, whichever is the sooner, save
                         in so far as this may be authorized by Act of Parliament on grounds of health or other
                         considerations pertaining to the public interest.

                (4) All persons shall have the right, at their own expense, to establish and to maintain private
                         schools, or colleges or other institutions of tertiary education: provided that:
                         (a) Such schools, colleges or institutions of tertiary education are registered with a
                                  Government department in accordance with any law authorizing and regulating
                                  such registration;
                         (b) the standards maintained by such schools, colleges or institutions of tertiary
                                  education are not inferior to the standards maintained in comparable schools,
                                  colleges or institutions of tertiary education funded by the State;
                         (c) no restrictions of whatever nature are imposed with respect to the admission of
                                  pupils based on race, colour or creed;
                         (d) no restrictions of whatever nature are imposed with respect to the recruitment of
                                  staff based on race or colour.

     2.3  Vision Statement

                        To be the ministry of excellence in providing quality education and
                                            training for national development

     2.4  Mission Statement

                To provide accessible and equitable quality education and training for a skilled,
                                           productive and competitive Nation

                The mission statement below defines the fundamental purpose for the Ministry of Education,
                succinctly describing why the Ministry of Education exists and what it has to do to achieve the
                Vision. The mission statement is based on the above mentioned Mandate.

6 STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017
2.5  Core Values 

         To achieve the Vision and Mission, the Ministry of Education has adopted the following core
         values to guide the management and work of all institutions within the Ministry. These values
         form the foundation of the Ministry of Education's culture and priorities, and provide a framework
         in which decisions should be made. They will guide the policies, strategies and the daily work
         and behaviour of staff members.

CORE VALUES        WHAT DO WE MEAN

Integrity          The Ministry will implement the values of accessible and equitable quality education in
                   all its institutions, linking these to the goals enunciated under Vision 2030. Members
                   of staff will demonstrate adherence to ethical principles in the way they carry out their
                   professional duties. They will perform their duties with integrity.

Accountability     Each institution within the Ministry will be accountable for implementing the agreed
                   plans, through a well-developed Monitoring and Evaluation (M & E) scheme.
                   Individual officers will be accountable for carrying out their responsibilities efficiently,
                   timely and with integrity.

Commitment         Every institution and every member of staff will demonstrate commitment to the
                   Government's objectives of providing accessible, equitable and quality education for
                   all. Such commitment will provide the foundation for continuous improvement within
                   the Ministry of Education's activities.

Respect & empathy  Every member of staff will show respect for the opinions and work of colleagues.
                   They will treat learners, parents and other stakeholders with dignity and politeness
                   at all times, embracing cultural diversity and tolerance.

Teamwork           Teamwork will be the modus operandi for achieving strategic objectives, as this is the
Professionalism    most important and most effective way of working. Team building will be an important
                   tool for every institution.

                   Institutions and individuals will exercise high levels of professionalism, never
                   compromising the Ministry's values and standards. Staff members will use their
                   skills and competencies, continuously in seeking opportunities to improve through
                   innovative approaches. Professionalism involves working collaboratively and fairly
                   with the common goal of serving the customers/stakeholders. Sharing knowledge of
                   best practices with colleagues at all levels, and enhancing the quality of our services
                   will be a practical expression of professionalism.

                                    STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017 7
CONCEPTUAL
          UNDERSTANDING, STRATEGIC

              THEMES AND OBJECTIVES

3.1 Conceptual Understanding

         The Namibian educational system is about quality learning. All professional and support staff
         from the classroom to the ministry are mindful that the decisions they make should relate to
         improving the delivery of education for quality learning. In this plan we set high standards for
         learning achievements leading to success in life. Our strategic plan will identify measureable
         outcomes that demonstrate the progress that learners will make over the next five years.

3.2 Strategic Themes

         The Ministry of Education identified five Strategic Themes in which the Ministry must excel.
         These Strategic Themes are the "pillars of excellence." They will be operationalized through the
         development of strategic objectives that describes specific things that the Ministry of Education
         must achieve to realise the vision, live up to the mission and deliver value to the customer/
         stakeholders.

  STRATEGIC THEMES                                               WHAT DO WE MEAN

1. TEACHING &                 This strategic theme focuses on providing accessible and equitable quality inclusive education
    LEARNING                  to the learners. It also focuses on the act or experience that has a formative effect on the
                              mind, character or physical ability of an individual. It further emphasizes learning as an act of
2. LEADERSHIP &               acquiring new or modifying existing knowledge, behaviour, skills, values or preferences.
  MANAGEMENT
                              This strategic theme focuses on visionary leadership and management by creating an
3. INFRASTRUCTURE             environment for staff members to perform to the best of their abilities. It emphasizes that leaders
4. REGULATORY                 and managers should be able to successfully integrate and maximize available resources within
                              the internal and external environment of the MOE for the attainment of set goals and objectives.
  FRAMEWORK
                              This strategic theme focuses on accelerating the pace of developing and maintaining the
5. STAKEHOLDER                physical infrastructure that is required for the education sector to fulfill its Mandate.
  RELATIONS
                              This strategic theme focuses on laws, policies and regulations that outline the legal requirements
                              to render quality education and training. They may also be complemented by policies, standards,
                              directives and guidelines to ensure that the education system is properly administered.

                              This strategic theme focuses on a strategic alliances and relationships between the Ministry of
                              Education and its key stakeholders in pursuit of common goals and objectives. It also aims to
                              build successful partnerships, which require both the Ministry of Education and stakeholders to
                              base their relations on trust, equality, mutual understanding and respect and obligations. The
                              Ministry requires the support of the key stakeholders to successfully align their plans to this
                              Strategic Plan.

8 STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017
3.3 Strategic Theme and Objectives 

  STRATEGIC THEMES                               STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
1. TEACHING &       1.1 Provide accessible and equitable quality inclusive education.
                    1.2 Improve supervision of teaching and learning.
    LEARNING        1.3 Ensure quality relevant learning content.
                    1.4 Create a conducive environment for teaching & learning.
2. LEADERSHIP &     1.5 Build educators' skills and competencies.
  MANAGEMENT        2.1 Enhance information & knowledge management.
                    2.2 Enhance management of the decentralization function.
3. INFRASTRUCTURE   2.3 Improve organizational performance.
4. REGULATORY       2.4 Enhance HIV prevention including Wellness.
                    2.5 Improve ICT provision and usage.
  FRAMEWORK         2.6 Strengthen management skills and competencies.
5. STAKEHOLDER      2.7 Attract, deploy & retain skilled workforce.
                    2.8 Ensure prudent financial management & adequate and fair allocation of
  RELATIONS
                        resources
                    3.1 Improve maintenance of infrastructure & Ensure modern and reliable physical

                        infrastructure
                    4.1 Ensure compliance to regulatory framework.
                    4.2 Ensure responsive regulatory framework.
                    5.1 Maximize benefits from strategic partnerships.
                    5.2 Increase collaboration with local, regional & international partners.
                    5.3 Strengthen and manage relations with key internal & external stakeholders.

                                     STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017 9
10 STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017          VISION : To be the ministry of excellence in providing quality education and training for national development.                                                    STRATEGY

                                       MISSION : To provide accessible and equitable quality education and training for a skilled, productive and competitive Nation

                               C                                   2. LEADERSHIP &                      1.1 Provide accessible      4. REGULATORY                      5. STAKEHOLDER
                               U                                    MANAGEMENT                          equitable and quality         FRAMEWORK                              RELATION
                               S
                               T                                                                           education for all                                            5.1 Maximize benefits
                               O                                                                              3. INFRASTRUCTURE                                             from strategic
                               M                                                                                                                                             partnerships
                               E
                                                                                                                                                                             5.2 Increase
                               R 1. TEACHING &                                                                                                                        collaboration with local,
                                              LEARNING                                                                                                                 regional & international

                               I 1.2 Improve supervision                                                                                                                        partners
                               N       on teaching learning
                               T                                   2.1 Enhance        2.2 Enhance                                                                     5.3 Strengthen & manage
                               E                                   information &    management of                                                                     relations with key internal
                               R                                                  the decentralization                              4.1 Ensure compliance              & external stakeholders
                               A                                    knowledge                                                       to regulatory framework
                               L         1.3 Ensure relevant       management           function                                     4.2 Ensure responsive
                                       quality learning content
                                                                                                        3.1 Improve maintenance      regulatory framework
                               P                                                                        of infrastructure & Ensure
                               R 1.4 Create a conducive
                               O environment for                                                           modern and reliable                                                                       MAP
                               C                                                                         physical infrastructure
                               E
                                       teaching & learning

                               S                                    2.3 Improve
                               S                                   organizational
                               E                                   performance
                               S         1.5 Build educator's
                                       skills and competencies

                               L       2.4 Enhance HIV prevention  2.5 Improve ICT provision            2.6 Strengthen management                                     2.7. Attract, deploy & retain
                               &            including wellness              and usage                     skills and competencies                                          skilled workforce
                               G
                                                                                                                                                                       PROFESSIONALISM
                               F                                   2.8 Ensure prudent financial management & adequate and fair allocation of resources
                               I
                               N

                                Core   INTEGRITY        ACCOUNTABILITY            COMMITMENT            RESPECT & EMPATHY                               TEAMWORK
                               Values
STRATEGIC
            PLAN-MATRIX

Defining the Strategic Themes and Strategic Objectives is not enough. A matrix for the

Strategic Plan was developed to ensure that there is a clear direction in successfully implementing the
strategy. The following terminologies used in the matrix are hereby defined;

· Strategic Objective: Is the statement of the desired result.

· Key Performance Indicators: Is a measure of performance. It answers the question "How
         success in achieving the strategy will be measured and tracked". It helps the Ministry of Education
         to define and evaluate how successful the institution is implementing the initiatives.

· Targets: Indicates the "desired result of a performance measure". The level of performance or
         rate of improvement needed or required. They are established by month; quarter, half-year and
         year. Its purpose is to keep the Ministry of Education focused on achieving the set strategic
         objectives.

· Initiatives: The projects and programmes that the responsible units have to undertake to ensure
         that the performance targets are met or executed. They drive strategic performance. Initiatives
         are means by which the Ministry of Education will achieve the strategic objectives. They should
         be at a higher level and strategic in nature avoiding the business as usual by all means. They will
         bring about change in service delivery in the Ministry of Education.

· Accountable Unit: A unit identified and given the responsibility to account and take ownership of
         the initiative set out in the Strategic Plan.

· Cost Estimates: Estimate costs required for the initiatives. Resource allocations (budgets)
         should be aligned, so as to ensure the achievement of maximum results with minimum resources.
         The focus should be on strategic outcomes/customer benefits/impacts as defined in the Strategic
         Plan.

                                                                                     STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017 11
12 STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017                       NDP 4                                                       Targets

                               Strategic Objective  Desired   KPI                            Baseline  2012/13  2013/14 2014/15   2015/16  2016/17           Programme/Initiative                 Responsible
                                                    Outcome                                                                                                                                           Unit
                                                                                                         82.9     83.5 84.1         84.7     85.3
                                                    no                                                   70.0     71.0 72.0         73.0     74.0                                                     PQA
                                                                                                         14.8     14.3 13.8         13.3     12.8
                                                              promotion rate - primary       82.3        21.6     21.3 21.0         20.7     20.4                                                     DAE
                                                                                                         2.3                        2.0                                                               PQA
                                                              promotion rate ­ secondary 69.0                     2.2 2.1                    1.9
                                                                                                         8.4                        6.3
                                                              repetition rate - primary      15.3        50%                        86%
                                                                                                        7547                      10 603
                                                              Repetition rate - secondary 21.9           99.9                       100
                                                                                                       386 982                    387 369
                                                              % of school dropouts ­         2.4         60.1                       69.1
                                                              primary                                  169 221                    184 913

                                                              % of school dropouts -         9.1       24 224   7.7 7.0           15 842   5.6
                                                              secondary
                                                                                                         49.6                       49.9
                                                              Net enrollment rate & No. of   38%                  62%      74%              98%
                                                              learners in pre-primary        6739        53.3    8453     9467       53    11 876

                               1.1 Provide accessible         Net enrollment rate & No.of      99.8      84.1     99.9     100      92.5     100    1.1.1 Outcomes and impact of accessible
                               and equitable inclusive 1 & 2  learners in primary education  386 596     47.6   386 982  387 369    50.6   387 369  and equitable inclusive quality education at
                               education at all levels
                                                              Net enrollment rate & No.        57.1               63.1 66.1                72.1 all levels.
                                                              of learners in secondary       164 293            174 298 179 527
                                                              education                                                                    190 460

                                                              Net enrollment in NLP at all   28 011             21 027 18 251              13 751
                                                              stages

                                                              % of girls' enrolment in       49.5               49.7 49.8                  50
                                                              primary phase (gender parity)

                                                              % of girls' enrolment in       53.4               53.2 53.1                  52.9
                                                              secondary phase (gender
                                                              parity)                                           86.9 89.7                  95.3
                                                                                                                48.6 49.6                  51.6
                                                              Survival rates in Grade 8      81.3

                                                              Survival rates in Grade 11     46.6
                                                    NDP 4                                                              Targets
                                                                                                                 2013/14 2014/15
                               Strategic Objective  Desired  KPI                              Baseline  2012/13  60,000 65,000    2015/16  2016/17  Programme/Initiative                         Responsible
                                                    Outcome                                                                                75,000                                                    Unit
                                                                                                        57,422     70% 75%        70,000
                                                       no
                                                                                                          68%                       80%
                                                             # of children enrolled in        57,422
                                                             ECD programmes                               32,7                      60%

                                                             % of Educarers who have          68%          0                        200    90%
                                                             more than 1 month training                 34 518                    37 400            1.1.2 Accessible and quality education
                                                             in ECD                                                                                                                              ECD
                                                                                                          12.8                      15.8   75%
                                                             % of ECD centres with            32,7       9 561   40% 50%          26 235
                                                             adequate sanitation                        17 020                    19 702
                                                             (functional toilets or latries)            13 550                    15 953
                                                                                                          80%                       74%
                                                             Number of ECD centres            0           450      50 100                   300
                                                             receiving GRN school feeding                        36 644 37 300      525    37 500
                                                                                                           60                        66
                                                             No enrolments in Distance        32 643      55%                       80%                                                          NAMCOL
                                                             Education programmes                         6.73                      5.44
                                                                                                         6 239                    16 464
                                                             % of secondary school            11.8               13.8 14.8                  16.8                                                 DNEA
                                                             learner that qualified to enter
                                                             tertiary institutions.                                                        36 729                                                 VET
                                                                                                                                           20 640                                                  HE
                                                             Number enrolled at VTC           6 816              13 385  18 739                                                                    HE
                                                                                                                 17 871  18 764            17 279
                                                             No of enrolments at UNAM 16 203                                                         1.1.3 Enrolments in educational programmes   VET
                                                                                                                 14 335  15 050                                                                    HE
                                                             No of students enrolled at       12 440                                        74%                                                    HE
                                                             PoN                                                                                                                                   HE
                                                                                                                                            550                                                  NCHE
                                                             Average annual completion        80%                74% 74%                     68
                                                             rates for VET trainiees                                                        90%                                                  NSFAF
                                                                                                                 460 490
STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017 13                                # of faculty positions at PoN 420                    62 64                     6.35
                                                                                                                 60% 70%
                                                             % of PoN students that pass 59                                                24 696
                                                                                                                 5.35 4.99
                                                             Pass rate at UNAM                50%

                                                             % increase in student            5
                                                             enrolments

                                                             No of Beneficiaries of NSFAF     4 991              8 110 11 355
                                                             Loan/Grants
14 STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017                       NDP 4                                                            Targets
                                                                                                               2013/14 2014/15
                               Strategic Objective  Desired  KPI                             Baseline 2012/13                   2015/16  2016/17  Programme/Initiative                            Responsible
                                                    Outcome                                                      2.1 2.2          2.3                                                                 Unit
                                                                                                                                  2.8
                                                    no                                                           2.6 2.7           0
                                                                                                                  0 204           90%
                                                             Rate of school performance      1.9  2                                              1.2.1 National standards and performance
                                                             at primary level (scale 1 ­ 4)                      50% 70%                         indicators and professional standards for
                                                                                                                                                 teachers to measure internal efficiency of
                                                                                                                                                 learning outcomes
                                                                                                                                         2.5 1.2.2 Learning support
                                                                                                                                                 1.2.3 Supervision of teaching and learning
                                                                                                                                                 1.2.4 Conducive environment for teaching and
                                                                                                                                                 learning
                                                                                                                                                 1.2.5 Educators' skills and competencies

                                                             Rate of school performance

                               1.2 Improve                   at secondary level (scale       2.4  2.5                                    2.9 1.2.6 Performance Management Systems
                               supervision on                                                132  168
                               teaching & learning  1&2      1-4).                                                                                                                                PQA
                                                             # of schools evaluated based
                                                                                                                                                  1.2.7 Sschool clustering system
                                                             on the national External                                                    240      1.2.8 Quality assurance systems at all levels.

                                                             School Evaluation (NESE).

                                                             % of Inspectors/ Education      10%  35%                                    100%     1.2.9 Standards for the education system.
                                                             Officers/school management                                                           1.2.10 Leaders with necessary skills and
                                                             trained on supervision for                                                           knowledge through in-service training.
                                                             teaching and learning                                                                1.2.11 Skills and competency based
                                                             (scale 1- 4)                                                                         programmes.
                                                                                                                                                  1.2.12 National standards and performance
                                                                                                                                                  indicators and professional standards for
                                                                                                                                                  teachers to measure internal efficiency of
                                                                                                                                                  learning outcomes.
                                                      NDP 4                                                            Targets
                                                                                                                 2013/14 2014/15
                               Strategic Objective    Desired              KPI                Baseline  2012/13                   2015/16  2016/17  Programme/Initiative                             Responsible
                                                      Outcome                                                                                                                                            Unit
                                                                                                            -                       54%
                                                      no                                                    -                       51%
                                                                                                          50%
                                                               Increasing SATS score Grade    46%         47%     50%      -          -           1.3.1 Inspectors of Education and Advisory
                                                               5                              43%         56%     47%      -          -    - teachers for English and Mathematics on the DNEA
                                                               a) English                               42.9%                         -    - interpretation of SATS reports.
                                                               b) Mathematics                           45.5%       -    55%      46.6%
                                                                                                        40.0%       -    52%      52.4%
                                                               SATS Grade 7 a) English b) 45%                       -    61%      47.5%    60% 1.3.2 Inspectors of Education and Advisory
                                                                                                        43.5%                              57% teachers for English, Mathematics and Natural PQA/DNEA
                               1.3 Ensure relevant             Maths                          42%       50.5%    44.2%  45.3%     45.6%    66% Science on the interpretation of SATS reports
                                                                                                        50.6%    47.8%  50.1%     52.3%
                               & quality learning              c) Science                     51%                42.5%  45.0%     55.8%
                                                                                                          1:2
                               content (Improve       1&2      Percentage of learners         40.8%                                 1:1    47.9%
                               learning achievements           achieving D or better in       44.2%       366                              54.7%
                               at all levels)                  Grade 12:                      34.0%                                 444    50.0%    1.3.3 Standards and competencies for             PQA/DNEA
                                                               Mathematics Science English                10%                                       learning.
                                                                                                                                    10%
                                                               Percentage of learners         41.4%       15%    44.2%  44.9%              46.3%    1.3.4 Curriculum at all levels to be aligned to  PQA
                                                               achieving D or better in       47.7%              51.1%  51.7%       30%    52.9%    the set standards                                POA
                                                               Grade 10:                      46.6%        48    52.4%  54.2%              57.4%
                                                               Mathematics Science English                                          198                                                              NLAS
                                                                                                          200     1:1    1.1
                               1.4 Create a           1 & 2 Ratio of learner to textbook      1:3                                   300    1:1 1.4.1 Adequate and relevant teaching and
                               conducive                                                      340                392 418                             learning material at all levels
                               environment for                   # of schools with proper
                               teaching & learning              library buildings                                                          470 1.4.2 Resource materials in libraries and
                                                                                                                                                     resource centers.
                                                               % increase of school           7%                 10% 10%
                                                               libraries learning resources.                                               10%

STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017 15                                  % increase of community        7%                 20% 25%                   35%
                                                               libraries resources

                                                               No. of schools with full-time  0                  98 148                    298 1.4.3 Psycho-social support services                  PQA
                                                               life skills teachers                                                                 to learners through training of life skills       IT

                                                               No. of schools with fully      83                 200 205                   350 teachers and support teacher councilors
                                                               equipped and functional
                                                               computers laboratories
16 STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017  Strategic Objective   NDP 4                KPI             Baseline 2012/13        Targets    2015/16  2016/17  Programme/Initiative                         Responsible
                                                    Desired                                  34 300         2013/14 2014/15    400                                                              Unit
                                                    Outcome  No of schools with internet     919 929                           959
                                                             facilities.                                      300 350                                                                             IT
                                                       no    No. of schools with            1:29 1:29         939 949          1:35
                                                             equipped science               1:24 1:25                          1:30                                                             PQA
                                                             laboratories                   1:50 1:45         1:29 1:32        1:30   200 1.4.4 Guideline to manage teaching and
                                                             Teacher learner ratio at                         1:25 1:28        50%             learning resources                               PoN
                                                             primary                                          1:40 1:30         30                                                              DPS
                                                             Teacher learner ratio at                                                 969                                                        HE
                                                             secondary                                                        90%                                                                HE
                                                             Lecture student rate at PoN                                              1:35     1.4.5 Staffing norms.                            M&E
                                                                                                                              50%     1:30     1.4.6 Appointment of teacher assistants for      PoN
                                                             % of educators meeting set   0    20% 30% 40%                     220    1:30     all learners with special needs.                 PoN
                                                             competency standards.        10    15 20 25                        10    60%      1.4.7 Additional support to all learners.
                                                                                                                                       35      1.4.8 Appropriate teaching &
                                                             % of Namibian faculty with                                                        learning materials
                                                             Phd's                                                                    100%
                                                                                                                                               1.5.1 Training needs assessment for
                               1.5 Develop          1&2      Pedagogical Skills coverage  50%  60%          70%  80%                  60%      educators.
                               educators'                    at UNAM                                                                   230     1.5.2 Professional educator training
                               skills and                                                                                              15      programme.
                               competencies                  % increase in teacher        15% 20% 30% 40%                                      1.5.3 Professionalize educators.
                                                             trainees.                    181 190 200 200                                      1.5.4 Competency standards.
                                                                                                                                               1.5.5 Induction course for all staff.
                                                             # of refereed publications                                                        1.5.6 Education programmes.

                                                             Faculty on sabbatical learning 0 2 4 8                                            1.5.7 Outcomes and impact of the
                                                                                                                                               professional training programmes.
                                                                                                                                               1.5.8 Mentoring system to offer support to
                                                                                                                                               serving staff.
                                                                                                                                               1.5.9 Cluster system.
                                                                                                                                               1.5.10 Training policy for educators.
                                                    NDP 4                                                          Targets
                                                                                                             2013/14 2014/15
                               Strategic Objective  Desired  KPI                          Baseline  2012/13                   2015/16  2016/17            Programme/Initiative                  Responsible
                                                    Outcome                                           250      250 300          300                                                                 Unit
                                                                                                       2        11               1
                                                    no                                                 4        44               4
                                                                                                    0.08%     0.1% 0.2%       0.25%
                                                             Number of staff members      220         50%                              300
                                                             trained on record                         5       75% 100%        100%
                                                             management.                                                                        2.1.1 Record management.                        NLAS
                                                                                                       6        31 63            63
                               2.1 Enhance                 No. of Regional Study          0            0        31 63            63    2        2.1.2 Equitable access to quality information   EMIS
                               information                 Resource Centres               5                     66               6              and lifelong learning.                          DRST
                               & knowledge          1 constructed                                               25 50            75
                               management                                                                      60% 70%          80%             2.1.3 Regional knowledge centres
                                                           Production time of annual
                                                           statistical reports (months).                                               4 2.1.4 Efficiency in production time.
                                                                                                                                                2.1.5 Research and Development
                                                             Increase in Research and
                                                             Development spending as 0.06%                                             0.3%
                                                             percent of GDP

                               2.2 Enhance          1&2      Degree of decentralization   25%                                          100%     2.2.1 Annual implementation plan                PAD
                               management of the             process accomplished                                                               2.2.2 Decentralization functional framework.
                               decentralization
                               function

                                                             No. of Performance           0                                            63       2.3.1 Organization structure to respond to the
                                                             Agreements signed and                                                              organizational mandate.
                                                             appraised

                                                             No of PMS based              0                                            63       2.3.2 Monitoring and evaluation system for
                                                             performance reviews                                                                education programmes at all levels.

                               2.3 Improve                   No of service-level                                                                2.3.3 Monitoring mechanism for performance
                               organizational
STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017 17  performance          2        agreements signed and        0                                            6 of                                                     DPS
                                                             appraised with SOE's
                                                                                                                                                SOEs and all other subsidized entities.

                                                             % of staff covered by PMS    0                                            100      2.3.4 Performance Management
                                                                                                                                                System at all levels.

                                                                                                                                                2.3.5 Iternal processes to improve internal

                                                             % set targets met in         30%       55%                                90%      efficiency and effectiveness
                                                             Directorates Annual Plans.                                                         2.3.6 Communication and coordination

                                                                                                                                                strategy
18 STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017   Strategic Objective    NDP 4   KPI                            Baseline  2012/13        Targets    2015/16  2016/17  Programme/Initiative                           Responsible
                                                      Desired                                    30        35    2013/14 2014/15     50                                                                Unit
                               2.4 Enhance            Outcome                                    40        50                        80
                               HIV Prevention                                                   2316     5595       40 45          4201
                               including Wellness;       no                                      12       21.5      60 70           55.6
                               Ensure leadership                                                  2        3      6100 6812          10
                               and management                  HIV Life Skills Education         600      600      29.8 47.4        750    55 2.4.1 % education sector learners and
                               commitment to HIV               including WoH and MFMC            62       100       56              250             students having comprehensive HIV
                               Prevention                                                                          600 750                                                                         HAMU
                                                             HIV Mainstreaming in other          29        41      150 200           73    90       Prevention knowledge and skills including       PoN
                               2.5 Improve ICT               Education Programmes                                                                   sexual reproductive health
                               provision and usage.                                             1:15      1:7       55 65           1:4
                                                      1 # and % of educators                     30        50                        85    3360     2.4.2 % of learners aged 6-19, exposed to HIV
                               2.6 Strengthen                knowing their HIV status and                          1:6 1:5                 100      Life Skills education including WoH and MFMC
                               management skills             remain the same                      0        0        60 70         10 000            2.4.3 % of employees, learners and students
                               and competencies
                                                               % of students with access to                       2000 5000          2              accessing and utilizing HIV as well as other
                                                               student services                                                      40    20 health and safety related services
                                                                                                                    43
                                                               Number of educators using                            20 30                  1000 IT
                                                               ICTs in education

                                                               No. of ICT users in libraries                                               300 2.5.1 Access to ICT at all institutions.
                                                               and CLDC's (000's)                                                                  2.5.2 ICT training, maintenance and support.

                                                      3 No. of community libraries/                                                        75 2.5.3 M&E process for ICT expansion.                 NLAS/IT
                                                             CLDC's providing access to
                                                             ICT

                                                               Student computer ration at                                                  1:3                                                     PoN
                                                               PoN                                                                                                                                 HR
                                                                                                                                                                                                   VET
                                                               % of staff trained to upgrade                                                100     2.6.1 Training needs assessment for all
                                                               their skills                                                                         2.6.2 Training and exposure programmes         HR
                                                                                                                                           15 000   2.6.3 Training data management system
                                                      2 Number placed in                                                                      1     2.6.4 Inclusion of leadership and
                                                             apprenticeship programme                                                        50     management courses for educators at tertiary
                                                                                                                                                    institutions
                               2.7 Attract, deploy &         % of staff turnover.             6         5                                           2.5.5 Apprenticeship programme
                               retain skilled                                                 0         10
                               workforce              3 No. of schools with full- time                                                              2.7.1 Appointment requirement for job
                                                             librarians                                                                             categories.
                                                                                                                                                    2.7.2 Career information system
                                                                                                                                                    2.7.3 Recruitment process
                                                        NDP 4                                                            Targets
                                                                                                                   2013/14 2014/15
                               Strategic Objective      Desired  KPI                            Baseline  2012/13                   2015/16  2016/17  Programme/Initiative                        Responsible
                                                        Outcome                                             3.0      2.5 2.0          1.5                                                             Unit
                                                                                                            4.5       5 6.0           6.5                                                             DPS
                                                        no                                                                            12.5
                                                                                                            2.5       5 10            260                                                             PAD
                                                                 Rate of variance (Over and     4.5                  260 260                 1.0      2.8.1 Budgeting and the planning processes
                                                                 Under spending reduced) (%)                                          224             2.8.2 Iternal participatory budgeting           DPS
                               2.8 Ensure prudent                                                                    206 228
                               financial                       % increase in the                3.6                                    6             guidelines                                       DPS
                               Management &             1 development budget                                          66               6     7.5 2.8.3 Per Capita Funding formula                     DPS
                                                                                                                      66               2
                               adequate and fair                                                                      33              60%             2.8.4 Funding formula for programmes and
                               allocation of resources                                                               45% 55%           90
                                                                 % increase in funding for      1.7                   75 80           100             institutions
                                                                 materials and supplies.                              86 93                  15.0 2.8.5 Allocation of funding to materials and

                                                                                                                                                      teaching supplies

                               3.1 Improve                       No of classrooms renovated 259           260                                260
                               maintenance of
                               Infrastructure &         2 No. of classrooms to be               198       211                                235 3.1.1 Infrastructure Master Plan
                               Ensure modern &                 constructed
                               durable physical                                                            6
                               infrastructure                                                              6
                                                                                                           3
                               4.1 Ensure                      No of service-level              0         40%                                 6
                               compliance to                   agreements signed and            0          70
                               regulatory framework     2 appraised                                        70                                 6 4.1.1 Monitoring & Evaluation Plan for SOEs

                                                               No. of performance reviews                                                     2
                                                               with SOEs
                                                                                                                                             70% 5.1.1 Donor Support to Education Master
                               4.2 Ensure responsive    2        No. of policies developed and  4                                                     Plan
                               regulatory framework              reviewed
                                                                                                                                             100 5.1.2 ETSIP Phase 2 Plan
STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017 19  5.1 Maximize                       % of development partner      30%                                                   5.1.3. Harmonised Educational Indicators
                               (optimize) benefits                agreements and other
                               from strategic                     instruments utilized.          0                                           100
                               partnership              1 & 2 % of KPI implemented               72

                                                                  % of budget spent on ETSIP
                                                                  planned DPS activities
20 STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017  Strategic Objective       NDP 4   KPI                                                       Targets           Programme/Initiative                          Responsible
                                                        Desired                            Baseline 2012/13 2013/14 2014/15 2015/16 2016/17                                                    Unit
                                                        Outcome

                                                           no

                               5.2 Increase                    No. of students             2405  2405  2405  2405  2405  2405                5.2.1 Strategic support from local, regional  PAD
                               collaboration with       4 accommodated in job                                                                and international partners.
                               local, regional &
                               international partners          attachments

                               5.3 Strengthen &

                               manage relations with    4        Level of stakeholder      1 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 5.3.1 Stakeholder Relations Master Plan                                         DPS
                               key internal & external           satisfaction (scale 1-4)

                               stakeholders

                               1. According to the National Housing Income and Expenditure Survey is evident that 11.6% of children age 6-13 were not in school. MOE will embark upon interventions
                               to address these imbalances.

                               Budget for the next three years (MTP Period) are expected to be as follows: 2012 - 13 (N$9.415 billion); 2013 - 14 (N$9.778 billion); 2014 - 15 (N$8.981 billion). Out of
                               these budgets, amounts under operational and development activities will be utilised for the next three years to address strategic objectives and initiatives under the
                               strategic plan.
NOTES

                                                                                     STRATEGIC PLAN 2012 - 2017 21
