mCeRpneEvneveCsesfinopvttoemfetecfivicietfmipolvetemtDslieetiucIeeDiemmvvtiRnivcleCvltisnnpoeeeEieteciDtneeepeiittoDeplivvvfvlovsntnueefmteemEeeEeeeiCIpitRttsvltnlCvfiicfosipDmlieeetofevcfveEIoCIiteiRopeennnlvnvemseileolefvupocmtmoecetteicfvpnileespDtptilsmileEmeuipieteumDCIicveRvimEvnleflnsnnoesRptieetfeoefevCceeeiiteiitttepfevvtevvmesilnnenioDttunetemReevsEIiliiECIttcilnovmvstpntteileifelDotiefeDteecoipfiRvceCiIvfviesepCvpnnnvelememelteEeueincuoeeietctmclREvovtlisfsttsopmeetilDteemEfivueiiiCIeiivRfpnntelvECvnlvleIiesesfpionoeenpevtttoemfeecfivicieeptfopnlvectemslieeEDtiuCcIteeDmeRtmlvtiRnmiiculCvlttisnnpoeeEioeteciiDteneesepIeivvittoevpinvvmvfsplivnsntneueeefvemteemEeicEeeiCIittlRettsvpelltnillCfioicefoipuDieeetRofeetvcfNvCEICDitpenRopeseinnnlvemtseileeotafvcutmioicmtemoecettiftivvmspiletvespiDtmtvilsmeveEiieeIuipiemCIvliicnveeeviEbivenlefnlnspenoeeRpDtieeltcfioefvceeoiaitteintetpfevvtelemeilnneupcitDttuFRetemRvsECIvliiCttcistmnoitvspteieneeifeIilDtiieovecoipvfinvRveaCiIvslveesevnnoemlenemecmteEieueinncoelitcplcEviltlisfsptetuDtopmeeiilRDefmaEfEivuiiCenesvRfpnnelvelleeCIieesfpoiecttfeenetSttomfvvesivicfieepottnnvcteemeseieiiEIDtiCcItelmveRmttcnlvliniiiulcovlfeDttnpetoeeicoefciioDeespeCIpnvvettevpelnmslrinnuieeuetemcveRtovmvEicSCittslRtsvpetvltiemleifeotIeieiiuieeREeovfrneevvlvCsIDapennospnnleleemtcsfeeiotocttfmipolieecteitlivesplpueDtpigDmmviltRveEiiceCeIumisCnvlmyneeetieetfnenspee:ietoDltcifvvoveeovsitt2einnemvtleeemeEnen0iuIpcitttRlenvlCIvlii1tftospDtmnoetpecfeei1CIiDiRopevncpvnveelCsC-leuoecmmoeleRe2tecmvtEiunolsoitp0svmiletifspeteuDeIime2imvRiefmEvnlvlinenoesp1nievseleeefCcepopictttepfetvvisilneepeoDtltunmReeiiiiECItDcCtltmvmvestnleiiieotefeDteteoiecoiInvfviisepCvpnnnvevvelemeinuteeettcmceleREovlitsoetlpDtlemfueioCIeiiRfpntEvnEevleCsesipnopvtoemetecffivictfmipolvfeetslieeetuIeeDiemmtiRnivcleCcvlisnnoEietecDtneetepeiittopivvivflvsntvnueefmeemeIEeeiCIetRttsvnlnlCiicfopDieeetecfcvEICitRoRpeennnlvseileoflvucmtmoecetteiufvpileesDttilsmseeuispiemCIicvviEivnlelnslnoeRpitieeievfvceeeiitttpfevveeilnneneDtuetemRsEIliCttcitnovstiefelDtieecoipfiRviIvIvesevnnnlememeeueincetclcEvlissttopeelDleEfiuuiiCv

Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

                 Towards Achieving Vision 2030

1  Towards Achieving Vision 2030  1
Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

  Ministry of Finance,                            2
  Fiscus Building,
  10 John Meinert Street
  Private Bag 13295,
  Windhoek,
  Namibia
  Tel: +264 61 209 9111
  Fax: +264 61 230179

  The document is also available on the internet
  at the following:
  www.mof.gov.na
  www.bon.com.na
  www.namfisa.com.na

  ISBN:978-99945-0-058-1

2 Towards Achieving Vision 2030
   Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

   Namibia Financial Sector Strategy 2011-2021

                  A Sector Development Document
                   Towards Achieving Vision 2030

                                          Republic of Namibia

1  Towards Achieving Vision 2030                 1
                                      Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

   TABLE OF CONTENTS

   Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                              3
   Foreword                                                                                4
   Executive Summary                                                                       5
   Vision at a Glance                                                                      7
   Introduction                                                                            8
   The Namibian Economy in 2021 and the Role of the Financial Sector: Vision Unpacked     10
   Current Status of the Namibian Financial System                                        13
   Reform Areas and Outcomes                                                              17
                                                                                          18
            Financial Markets Deepening and Development                                   23
            Financial Safety Net                                                          25
            Financial Inclusion                                                           25
                                                                                          28
                     Consumer Financial Literacy and Protection                           33
                     Access to Financial Services and Products                            35
            Localisation of the Namibian Financial Sector                                 38
            Skills Development in the Financial Sector
   Institutional Arrangement, Monitoring and Evaluation of the NFSS

2  Towards Achieving Vision 2030                                                       2
                                       Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

   ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

   ATM      Automated Teller Machine
   BON      Bank of Namibia
   BES      Book Entry System
   CMA      Common Monetary Area
   EFT      Electronic Funds Transfer
   GDP      Gross Domestic Product
   GIPF     Government Institutions Pension Fund
   NAMFISA  Namibia Financial Institutions Supervisory Authority
   NDP      National Development Plan
   NEEEF    New Equitable Economic Empowerment Framework
   NFLWG    National Financial Literacy Working Group
   NFSC     Namibian Financial Sector Charter
   NFSS     Namibian Financial Sector Strategy
   NISS     Namibia Interbank Settlement System
   NPS      National Payment System
   NSX      Namibian Stock Exchange
   Repo     Repurchase Agreement
   SADC     Southern African Development Community
   SME      Small and Medium Enterprise
   SOE      State-Owned Enterprise
   WEF      World Economic Forum

3           Towards Achieving Vision 2030                                            3
   Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

   FOREWORD

   The Namibian Financial Sector Strategy is a long-term development strategy for the Namibian financial sector.
   It is expected that the strategy will guide the achievement of the financial sector objectives as set out in the
   various national development plans (NDPs and Vision 2030); through consolidating them; especially those relating
   to capital and financial markets development, ownership of financial institutions, access to finance, consumer
   protection and financial literacy. Ultimately the Strategy should contribute to fostering economic growth and
   poverty alleviation as well as reducing income inequality. Furthermore, the Strategy takes cognisance of on-going
   regional initiatives with regard to financial sector development, as well as global initiatives in response to global
   developments such as those witnessed during the recent global financial crisis.

   The successful implementation of the identified strategic initiatives and the outcome of the Strategy will offer
   significant benefits for Namibia; however this will only be possible with the support and timely interventions from
   all stakeholders. There should be a continuation of a process that led to the development of this Strategy, which
   involved a wide-spectrum of industry stakeholders in addition to the working group consisting of officials from the
   Ministry of Finance, Bank of Namibia and NAMFISA. I would like to extend my sincere gratitude to all of you who
   gave contributions and supported the formulation of the Strategy.

                                                                                                            Saara Kuugongelwa- Amadhila
                                                                                                                            Minister of Finance

4  Towards Achieving Vision 2030                 4
   Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

   The importance of the financial sector to the general economic growth of a country            The financial sector
   is well documented, especially through the intermediation channel. Where financial            plays an important role
   services are supplied broadly and efficiently, they accelerate economic growth, increase      in the economy
   the efficiency of resource allocation and improve the distribution of wealth. This, in
   essence, is what Namibia needs taking the aspirations of the country's Vision 2030 into
   consideration. Achieving a more efficient, competitive and resilient financial system will
   be vital for securing the prospects for sustainable economic growth and development.

   A review of Namibia's financial system shows that although the system is sound and            Weaknesses have been
   well-functioning, there are structural weaknesses that need to be addressed to enable         identified in the financial
   the financial sector to contribute meaningfully to the overall performance of the country's   system
   economy. Key weaknesses identified include: a shallow financial market; limited
   competition, limited financial safety nets, under-developed capital market; inadequate
   and less effective regulation; limited access to financial services; low financial literacy
   and lack of consumer protection; lack of consumer activism, limited skills; and low
   participation by Namibians and thus dominance of foreign ownership.

   A ten year strategy has been developed to address the weaknesses in the Namibian              Weaknesses
   financial system, covering the period 2011-2021, which will enable the country's financial    necessitated the
   sector to transform and contribute meaningfully to the developmental objectives of the        development of the
   country. The purpose of the Strategy is to chart the future direction of the financial        Strategy
   system over the next 10 years that will ensure its effectiveness, competitiveness and
   resilience.

   The overall objective of the Namibian Financial Sector Strategy (NFSS) is therefore to        Implementation of the
   develop a more resilient, competitive and dynamic financial system with best practices        Strategy will result in the
   in order for the sector to realise its full potential in respect of its contribution to the   sector realizing its full
   growth of the economy and the achievements of socio-economic objectives of poverty            potential
   reduction and wealth creation., Further, the strategy envisions the emergence of strong
   and innovative domestic financial institutions that are more technology driven and
   ready to face the challenges of globalisation. Threats of the global marketplace are
   becoming more intensive, as global players and technological advancement are having
   an unprecedented impact on the business approach of financial institutions. Against
   this background, it is vital for the financial sector, to prepare and ensure that it remains
   effective and responsive in the face of a more globalised, liberalised, diversified and
   sophisticated domestic economy.

   Thus, the development of the Namibian Financial Sector Strategy is a national response        Strategy aims to guide
   to address the structural weaknesses in the sector in order to achieve the above-stated       the development of the
   national and sector-specific objectives. The Strategy constitutes a single reference          financial sector
   document that guides the development of the country's financial sector despite existing
   national policy documents (e.g., Vision 2030, NDP3 and the NFSC). In particular, it
   provides the strategic policy guidance for the achievement of goals, including the NFSC

5  Towards Achieving Vision 2030                                                                                     5
   Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

   initiatives, within the context of overall national development policies, i.e. the NFSC is in  Strategy has identified
   actual fact part of the Strategy. In this regard, the Strategy consolidates and articulates    five (5) reform areas
   the strategic initiatives contemplated in the sector development and transformation
   policies. Once fully implemented, the initiatives shall result in a developed and modern
   financial system for Namibia. To this end, the Strategy entails an Action Plan to
   implement, monitor and evaluate progress towards the achievement of the outcomes.

   The development of the Strategy has become more urgent in view of threats posed by
   advances in technology that enables financial institutions to develop products that are
   inherently more risky and can destabilise the financial system. In fact, the recent global
   financial crisis was mainly attributed to these risky products.

   The Strategy focuses on reforms in the following key areas:

   · Financial markets deepening and development
   · Financial safety net
   · Financial inclusion:

             Consumer financial literacy and protection
             Access to financial services and products
   · Localisation of the Namibian financial sector
   · Skills development in the financial sector

6  Towards Achieving Vision 2030                                                                  6
   Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

           VISION AT A GLANCE

                 By the end of year 2021, the following should have been achieved:

                                    · a deepened, an efficient and developed financial system;
                                          · respected, world class and effective regulators;

                                    · a stable, well regulated and competitive financial sector;
                                        · significant local ownership of financial institutions;
                                                   · an inclusive financial sector; and

                      · financially literate and protected consumers of financial services and products.

   By having these in place, Namibia would have an effective, efficient, stable, competitive, resilient and inclusive
                                                         financial system by 2021.

7  Towards Achieving Vision 2030                                                                                       7
   Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

   INTRODUCTION

   1. The Namibian economy has recorded satisfactory and sustained growth since                   There has been
        independence. Growth has averaged 3 percent while inflation has remained low at           Increased financial
        single digits, on average, during the period. The sector has experienced a phase          sector contribution to
        of dynamic growth. Financial intermediation's contribution to GDP grew from 2.0           the economy since
        percent in 1990 to 3.6 percent in 2000 and further to 4.3 percent in 2010. In             independence while the
        the next ten years, the financial sector is expected to play a pronounced role in         sector is expected to
        supporting economic growth through an expanded intermediation role.                       even enhance its role
                                                                                                  further
   2. The Namibian financial system remained stable during the global financial crisis
        started in 2007 and intensified in 2008. The overall direct impact of the crisis on       Namibia's financial
        the domestic financial system has been relatively low, thanks in part to limited          system has been
        exposure to sub-prime-related investments by financial intermediaries which was           stable but the future is
        made possible by existing exchange control regime. The 2009 World Economic                unpredictable
        Forum (WEF) report also appraised the banking sector of Namibia as being sound,
        ranking in the 7th position in Africa; and thus evidencing the stability of the system.
        While there has been stability so far, the future is unpredictable and the opportunity
        is now taken to be forward looking so as to build the necessary foundation that
        will enable the financial sector to continue playing its important role in the economy
        and to continue being strong and resilient in facing possible future challenges.

   3. An assessment of the current status of Namibia's financial system shows that                A review of the
        although the system is sound and well-functioning, there are weaknesses that              Namibian financial
        need addressing to enable the financial sector to contribute more meaningfully            system revealed key
        to the overall performance of the country's economy. Key weaknesses identified            weaknesses
        include: a shallow financial market; limited competition, limited financial safety nets,
        under-developed capital market; inadequate and less effective regulation; limited
        access to financial services; low financial literacy and lack of consumer protection;
        absence of effective consumer activism, limited financial management skills;
        and low participation by Namibians and thus dominance of foreign ownership of
        financial institutions.

   4. To address the weaknesses in the Namibian financial system, a ten-year Strategy             A ten-year Strategy
        covering the period 2011-2021 has been developed which will enable the country's          is being developed to
        financial sector to transform and contribute more meaningfully to the socio-economic      address the weaknesses
        objectives of, amongst others, poverty reduction and wealth creation as contained
        in the various development plans (NDPs and Vision 2030). The purpose of the
        Strategy is to provide a road map of the financial system over the next 10 years that
        will ensure its effectiveness, competitiveness and resilience. This future landscape
        has been developed against the backdrop of an increasingly global and integrated
        economic environment and financial markets as well as the socioeconomic
        objectives of the country. The objective of the Namibian Financial Sector Strategy
        (NFSS) is therefore to develop a more resilient, competitive and dynamic financial
        system with best practices, that support and contributes positively to the growth

8                Towards Achieving Vision 2030                                                    8
   Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

        of the economy, and has strong and innovative domestic financial institutions that     The Strategy will serve
        are more technology driven and ready to face the challenges of globalisation.          as a single reference
                                                                                               document for financial
   5. While it is acknowledged that there are plans and targets already set in various         sector development in
        documents (e.g., NDP3 and NFSC) directed towards the development of the                Namibia
        financial sector, the development of the Namibian Financial Sector Strategy is a
        national response to address the structural weaknesses in the sector in order to
        achieve the above-stated national and sector-specific objectives. As such, the
        Strategy constitutes a single reference document that guides the development of
        the country's financial sector, and the voluntary NFSC should be viewed as part
        of the Strategy. In the absence of a consolidated strategy and strategic initiatives,
        sector development impediments and deficiencies might persist.

   Namibia's financial system has been stable but the future is unpredictable

9  Towards Achieving Vision 2030                                                               9
    Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

THE NAMIBIAN ECONOMY IN 2021
AND THE ROLE OF THE FINANCIAL
SECTOR: VISION UNPACKED

6. According to the Vision 2030, the Namibian economy is expected to grow on                     Vision 2030 expects the
     average by 6.2 percent. The financial sector is expected to play an important role          economy to grow and
     towards the achievement of the projected growth, with financial intermediation              hence an increase in the
     expected to grow on average by 6.3 percent over the next 10 years. As the                   demand for finance
     economy grows, there will be increased demand for finance from companies
     that are expanding. This demand for financing will be met not only by banks, but
     increasingly by the capital market as well as venture capital and private equity. At
     the same time the demand for auxiliary financial services such as insurance will
     increase. To underpin this, the financial sector will continue to be developed and
     deepened, through the introduction of new and specialised products that respond
     to the needs of sophisticated consumers that are increasingly literate.

7. The Namibian financial system will have the ability to create a dynamic set of
     financial players, which are able to provide support to the domestic economy, and
     more importantly, which are increasingly more efficient, competitive, and able to
     facilitate the economic transformation process.

8. The financial system will be more resilient, competitive and dynamic with best                Namibia will have a more
     practices, which support and contribute positively to the growth of the economy,            resilient, competitive and
     and has strong and innovative domestic financial institutions that are more                 dynamic financial system
     technology driven and ready to face the challenges of globalisation. Threats of             to support sustainable
     the global marketplace are becoming more intensive, as global players and                   economic growth
     technological advancement are having an unprecedented impact on the business
     approach of financial institutions. Against this background, it is vital for the financial
     sector, to prepare and ensure that it remains effective and responsive in the face of
     a more globalised, liberalised and a more complex domestic economy.

9. Going forward, the ability of the financial institutions to deliver products and
     services in the most efficient and effective manner will be key to determining
     performance and relevance of the financial sector. The Namibia Financial Sector
     Strategy, therefore, will ensure a financial system that is best suited to the Namibian
     economy, given the challenges posed by the environment in which Namibia as a
     small open economy operates. In this regard, achieving a more efficient, competitive
     and resilient financial system will be vital for securing the prospects for sustainable
     economic growth and development.

10. In summary, the overall goal of the Strategy is therefore for Namibia to have a well
     developed and diversified financial sector which will be characterised by efficiency,
     effectiveness and stability.

10  Towards Achieving Vision 2030                                                                10
                                        Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021                11

   Efficiency

    11. Efficiency will manifest in the form of a range of financial products and services that
          should be offered at the lowest possible cost to both institutional and individual
          consumers, namely borrowers, investors, depositors, risk managers, etc. In this
          regard, improvement in productivity and higher returns on assets for the financial
          institutions will need to be realised through greater penetration of efficient and low
          cost delivery channels, procurement and other back-office functions, and leveraging
          on world-class skills. This operational efficiency can be achieved through greater
          investment in technology and skills enhancement.

   Effectiveness

    12. An effective financial system will require financial institutions to be innovative in
          coming up with a range of highly differentiated products, services and delivery
          channels, tailored to meet specific demands of the consumers and the corporate
          sector.

   Stability

    13. Regulatory and supervisory efforts will be geared towards the maintenance of
          the stability of the financial system. In this regard, robust financial institutions,
          infrastructure and prudential regulation will be an important necessity. This will be to
          ensure that the system is able to withstand sudden adverse economic and financial
          shocks that emanate from within and outside the system without significantly
          disrupting the intermediary function and the functioning of the economy.

         Prudential regulations

    14. Financial institutions will have to be robust, backed by strong prudential regulations
          and supervision. The robustness of institutions will be demonstrated in having strong
          risk management capabilities and credit skills in place as well as sound corporate
          governance. In this regard, the use and application of, among others, financial
          models and comprehensive risk, liquidity, and credit management frameworks will
          be necessary, so as the quality and accountability of the board of directors and
          management of financial institutions.

         Robust financial institutions

    15. Amidst the need to provide an environment which is conducive to the development
          of an efficient and innovative financial system, strong and effective prudential
          regulations and supervision is necessary as these are the foundation of a strong
          financial system and efficient regulatory institutions.

11 Towards Achieving Vision 2030
                                   Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

    Infrastructure

16. Strong infrastructure will have to be available to ensure overall stability of the financial
     system. This will be achieved through institutional development and capacity
     building, increasing the competitive environment, the continuous improvement in
     the existing payments and financial markets infrastructure, and instituting a more
     market-driven consumer protection framework.

17 Against the above objectives, the Strategy identifies outcomes for the financial
     sector to progressively develop to achieve the broad national objectives and to
     adapting and adjusting to the forces of change in the domestic and international
     environment.

12  Towards Achieving Vision 2030                                                                 12
                               Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

CURRENT STATUS OF THE
NAMIBIAN FINANCIAL SYSTEM

18. The Namibian financial system comprises the Bank of Namibia as the central bank,
     five commercial banks, a number of other banking institutions, a range of non-
     bank financial institutions such as insurance companies and pension funds, smaller
     financial intermediaries in the form of stockbrokers and money market funds, and
     the Namibian Stock Exchange. The financial institutions operating in Namibia are
     the following:

(a) Commercial Banks

· First National Bank of Namibia (Ltd.)
· Standard Bank of Namibia (Ltd.)
· Nedbank Namibia (Ltd.)
· Bank Windhoek (Ltd.)
· FIDES Bank (Ltd.)

At the end of 2010, total bank assets, deposits and loans increased from the level
recorded in 2009 (see table below).

          Total Assets           Total Deposits                 Total Loans

          2009           2010        2009         2010        2009        2010
                                 41,200,832  44,583,831  35,418,820  38,725,170
Industry  47,669,192 52,501,025
(N$m)

Source: Bank of Namibia

(b) Other specialised finance institutions

· Namibia Post Office Savings Bank (a division of NamPost Ltd)
· Agricultural Bank of Namibia Ltd
· National Housing Enterprise Ltd
· Development Bank of Namibia Ltd

    Financial depth

19. The importance of the financial sector to the general economic growth of a country
     is well documented, especially through the intermediation channel. When financial
     services are supplied broadly and efficiently, they accelerate economic growth,
     increase the efficiency of resource allocation and improve the distribution of wealth.

20. Financial depth is measured as deposit resources mobilised and credit extended
     by the financial system (banking) relative to GDP. In Namibia, domestic credit to

13 Towards Achieving Vision 2030                                                             13
                                      Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021                    14

        the private sector as a percentage of GDP was recorded at 46 percent in 2010, as
        was the case in 2009. Broad money supply (M2) as a percentage of GDP was 41
        percent in 2010, compared to 40.0 percent in 2009.

  21. Although the depth of the Namibian financial system is relatively higher (compared
        to other countries in the region), there is still room for growth and expansion in
        order to reach a higher level comparable to the developed nations. This would
        require growth of the financial sector by reaching those segments of the population
        currently not served by it.

  (c) Non-bank financial institutions

  Non-bank financial institutions comprise of insurance, pension funds, investment
  managers, unit trusts, microfinance institutions, a stock exchange and stock brokers.
  At the end of 2010, total industry assets1 were recorded at N$205,217 million, an
  increase from N$172,296 million in 2008, and N$191,451 million in 2009.

      Insurance

  22. At the end of 2010, there were 18 long-term insurance companies and one
        reinsurance company in Namibia. The industry's assets were N$25.2 billion,
        accounting for 29.6 percent of GDP in 2010. During 2010 there were 14 short-
        term insurers, including one re-insurer, as well as 121 insurance brokers and 395
        insurance agents. The industry's assets were N$2.4 billion, accounting for 2.8
        percent of Namibia's GDP2 in 2010. Access to especially short-term insurance
        services remains very low for the greater portion of the population. According to
        the 2007 FinScope survey, less than 10 percent of the population have access to
        these services.

      Pension Funds

  23. Namibia has a high number of registered pension funds. In 2010, there were 167
        active registered pension funds (excluding foreign funds), which covered about
        161 478 members. There is a need to expand the pension coverage in Namibia,
        since the existing pension funds do not extend to all Namibians. Therefore, there
        are efforts underway to establish a National Pension Scheme that will cover all
        Namibians. The GIPF accounts for the bulk of pension funds assets (around 70%).
        The assets of the pension funds were N$63.9 billion in 2010, accounting for 75.1
        percent of GDP. Namibia has one of the highest rates of pension assets as a
        percentage of GDP in the world, the bulk of which is mainly invested outside the

   1 The assets of insurance, pension funds and medical aid funds are included in the assets managed
  by investment managers and management companies. In addition, a portion of assets managed by
  management companies are also managed by investment managers. There is, therefore, considerable
  double counting of assets.
  2 Estimated GDP figure by BoN used, given the absence of final data.

14 Towards Achieving Vision 2030
                                        Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

         country. Local investment requirements compel pension funds and long-term
         insurers to invest a minimum of 35 percent of their assets in Namibia so as to curb
         capital outflow and ensure effective utilization of funds in the local economy.

        Investment managers

    24. The total registered investment managers or asset management companies in
         Namibia were 38 in 2010, while the total funds under management was recorded
         at N$86.1 billion as at the end of 2010. Investment managers mainly invest the
         resources from pension funds, long term insurers and unit trust schemes. In 2010,
         investment managers invested about 55.3 percent of total assets from pension
         funds and 14.1 percent from long-term insurers.

        Unit trusts

    25. The unit trust industry in Namibia has shown tremendous growth over the past few
         years. There were 10 registered unit trust management companies at the end of
         2010. The total funds under management increased from N$13.9 billion in 2007 to
         N$25.9 billion in 2010, with most of the inflow and growth recorded in the money
         market funds.

        Microfinance institutions

    26 Micro finance institutions have the potential to provide financial services to
         many people that the banks are not able to serve. The number of micro lending
         institutions increased from 186 in 2006 to 347 in 2010. Total loans granted by the
         registered micro lenders amounted to N$682million during 2008. This represents
         an increase of 27 percent from N$538 million granted in 2007. For 2010, loans
         amounting to N$1,080 million were issued by micro lenders, an increase of 28
         percent, when compared to the 2009 figure. This increase can be attributed to the
         growth in the number of micro lenders during that period. Microfinance institutions'
         rates are, however, exorbitant compared to other conventional lenders. Existing
         microfinance institutions only cater for a certain segment of the population, i.e.
         salaried individuals, thus there is a need for more microfinance institutions that will
         cater for the excluded segment of the population who are mainly the poor and also
         for small-scale entrepreneurs.

        Stock exchange

    27. The Namibian Stock Exchange (NSX) is the only licensed stock exchange in
         Namibia in terms of the Stock Exchanges Control Act (No.1 of 1985). Securities
         listed on the NSX consist of primarily dual-listed South African companies and
         primary-listed Namibian companies.

15  Towards Achieving Vision 2030                                                                 15
                                   Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

Year            2002         2003  2004   2005   2006     2007      2008  2009   2010
                                   2 492  2 630  3 820
Local market (N$ million)

Market          1 728 2 054                               4 781     5 720 7 126  7 782

capitalisation

Listed 12 11 9 9 9                                        7 77 7
securities

Liquidity (%) 1.96           1.86  10.6   2.62   7.00     6.20      5.15 2.58    1.72

Overall market (N$ million)

Market          386 617 460 315 573 878 769 585 1112 542  1186 365  736 456 1 047 527 1178 257
capitalisation                                            27
Listed          35 35 32 28 28                            11.24     29 33        33
securities
Liquidity (%)   0.45         047   7.16   6.75   8.76               12.72 0.83   0.64

Source: NSX

28. As can be seen from the above table, the NSX is characterised by low levels of
     liquidity. This can be ascribed to the buy-and-hold strategy adopted by most
     investors in Namibia, partly due to a lack of sufficient instruments. The reason
     for holding on to trading instruments has been often cited to be the need to
     comply with local investment requirements. There is, however, definitely a case for
     improving the liquidity on the local exchange.

    Stockbrokers

29. There are 4 registered stockbrokers in Namibia, who act as intermediaries between
     investors and the stock exchange.

30. From the above, it is clear that the Namibian financial sector is relatively developed,
     sound and well-functioning. However, there is room for improvement especially
     in addressing the identified weaknesses. Therefore, the next section gives details
     of the identified weaknesses and proposes outcomes, which would result in a
     developed and modern financial system for Namibia.

16                                        Towards Achieving Vision 2030                         16
    Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

    REFORM AREAS AND OUTCOMES3

        The outcome of the proposed reform areas, together with the undertaking by the voluntary Financial Sector
                          Charter, should result in a developed and modern financial system for Namibia.

    3 Due to a lack of baseline data/information, some outcomes have not been quantified as well as timelines for some strategies have not
    been indicated due to the nature of the strategies. This should however be done once information becomes available.

17  Towards Achieving Vision 2030                                                                                                           17
    Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

FINANCIAL MARKETS DEEPENING
AND DEVELOPMENT

31. A deepened financial system stimulates economic growth and lowers the cost               A deepened financial
     of financial intermediation by increasing both the range and variety of financial       system stimulates
     instruments available to savers and investors. It can also mobilize and channel         economic growth and
     savings more effectively to productive investments. Such a financial system enjoys      lowers the cost of
     increased stability and resilience and can adjust to better absorb internal and         financial intermediation
     external shocks. A fully developed financial system is able to link the domestic and
     international financial markets and thereby enhance international capital flows and
     portfolio diversification.

    Current situation assessment and challenges

32. The Namibian financial system is not considered deep enough, but relatively well         The Namibian financial
     developed compared to most financial systems in African countries. However,             system well developed
     although the system is sound and well-functioning, there are structural weaknesses      and sound but is shallow
     that need to be addressed to enable the financial sector to contribute meaningfully
     to the overall performance of the country's economy. These include a shallow
     financial market which this chapter aims to address. The shallow financial markets
     have been manifested in the outlined below.

33. Though well developed, the available instruments in the money market falls short         There are insufficient
     of expectation. The bonds market on the other hand is Government dominated              instruments in the money
     with only a few public and private institutions, which poses a serious challenge        market, bonds market
     to the development of the primary bonds market as the issuers' base is not well         is Government dominated
     diversified. Furthermore, the secondary market is relatively illiquid, with trading     while the secondary
     having been by and large constrained by the relatively lower issuance of bonds          market is relatively illiquid
     and this has created a situation whereby holders of these instruments are unwilling
     to trade in fear of the struggle faced when trying to replace an instrument which is    There is not much trading
     sold. Other factors such as the limited number of issuers in the local capital market   at the NSX
     and domination of institutional investors as largest holders of debt securities
     also contributes to the situation somewhat. The NSX has also been faced with a
     challenge of a lack of liquidity as not much trading has been taking place. There is
     also only a limited number of local listed companies, and hence the dominance of
     dual listed companies on the NSX.

34. Moreover, the banking system is characterized by high concentration and a lack of        The Banking industry is
     competition. Attracting new foreign financial institutions could provide a competitive  highly concentrated and
     stimulus and help spur innovation in products and practices, and Namibia                lacks competition

18  Towards Achieving Vision 2030                                                            18
    Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

         has established a Competition Commission whose role is to enforce competition            Namibia has good
         laws and ensure that there are no competition distortions to all firms operating in      financial infrastructure
         the marke as well as to potential firms wanting to enter the market.
                                                                                                  Financial regulation in
    35. There is good local financial services infrastructure, though, with National Payment      Namibia is sound, but
         System as a backbone. With the reform of the National Payment System, the                archaic laws need to be
         Namibian banking industry managed to establish local payment infrastructure              reformed
         for the clearing and settlement of domestic transactions. The Namibia Inter-bank
         Settlement System (NISS) facilitates settlement of Namibian interbank transactions,      Legislation reform is
         while a payment clearing house (NAMCLEAR) is also in place. The local switch             in process, new laws
         (NAMSWITCH) enables all Namibian inter-bank Automated Teller Machine (ATM)               have been enacted,
         card transactions to be switched locally and settled as well as Point-of-Sale            amendments to some
         terminals card transactions to be switched locally and settled in NISS. In addition,     others have been
         the Bank of Namibia and the banking industry has recently launched the revised           effected
         Vision for the Namibian National Payment System which sets strategic objectives
         for the National Payment System until 2015

    36. Other identified issues that are considered as important aspects in the process
         of striving for the deepening and development of the financial markets in Namibia
         relates to regulation. This is because financial regulation can have an impact on
         the structure, size and efficiency of the financial system, operations of the financial
         institutions and markets as well as the level of competition in the financial system.
         The Namibian financial sector regulation is generally sound; however, there has
         been an existence of certain archaic pieces of legislation. Further, as new standards
         are set globally; Namibia must also follow these trends and update its regulatory
         structure accordingly.

    37. The country has thus in recent years embarked upon reforming certain laws, passed
         new laws and adopted standards similar to the ones adopted globally. Amongst
         others, recent pieces of legislation that relates to the financial sector include the
         introduction of the Financial Intelligence Act and the Prevention of Organised Crime
         Act and the Combating of the Financing of Terrorism Bill, the implementation of
         Basel II and the enactment of the Bank of Namibia amendments to the Banking
         Institutions Act in 2010. These amendments provide for amongst others,
         consolidated supervision, outlawing pyramid schemes and money laundering,
         licensing, governance and various financial and operational requirements of
         banks.

    38. In view of the above identified weaknesses, reform is needed so that the ideal
         situation as suggested by the below outcome is achieved.

19  Towards Achieving Vision 2030                                                                 19
                                      Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021            20

 Outcome 1:

  Namibia to have an active capital market (securities market) characterised by
  higher turnover, liquidity and immediacy. In this regard, the NSX local market
  capitalisation is expected to reach 75% of GDP by 2021.

  Strategies to achieve the outcome

  To achieve the above outcome, the following will be undertaken:

  i. Determine through a Cost and Benefits Analysis Study the possibility of
        demutualizing the NSX to enable it to be listed on the exchange to segregate
        its trading rights from its ownership and to enhance its regulatory functions.

  ii. The viabillity of the primary dealership system for the government bond market
        will be reviewed as well as the secondary market repurchase agreements
        (repos) operationalized, i.e. there will be lending through repo market among
        commercial banks and among third parties to improve liquidity in the interbank
        market and the bond market. As such, the insolvency law will have to be amended
        to facilitate repo market transactions.

  iii. New instruments such as exchange traded funds, securitized securities
        and derivatives in general, may be developed to facilitate the process of
        deepening the market.

  iv. To lessen the burden on the State, that usually manifest itself in the form of
        government subsidies and/or guarantees extended to state agencies, certain
        state agencies (including local authorities) with good balance sheets will be
        encouraged to issue more corporate papers (both short- and long-term) as
        an alternative to bank financing. This will increase the number and size of debt
        instruments available in the Namibian capital market.

  v. The Government shall consider working with the private sector to leverage on
        public private partnerships. This will increase investment opportunities, efficiency
        and growth.

  vi. All Namibian incorporated financial institutions, with an embedded valuation
        in excess of or upon reaching a certain amount (which is still to be determined),
        as well as their foreign holding company, if any, will be encouraged to list on
        the NSX. With regards to banking institutions, there is envisaged to be a regulation
        that would prescribe mandatory listing.

  vii. The infrastructure needed for efficient operation of the stock exchange will

20 Towards Achieving Vision 2030
    Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

         be supported. These include amongst others a Central Securities Depository            Creating enabling
         (CSD). Thus, the feasibility and viability of having a sustainable CSD shall be       regulatory environment
         investigated so as to design and implement a CSD which will enable electronic         is important for financial
         trading of Namibian government securities and other securities; achieve               sector deepening and
         international standards and best practices, and facilitate the deepening of           development
         the financial market in Namibia. This is so because the existence of the CSD
         (as opposed to the current Book Entry System (BES) environment) will have the
         capability to serve the entire securities market in Namibia. It will also be able to
         be integrated within the Namibia Inter-bank Settlement System (NISS) in order to
         achieve Delivery versus Payments (DvP) for securities transactions as envisaged in
         the National Payment System Vision 2015.

    viii. By virtue of it being a major player in the economy, there shall be a national
         strategy to enhance the role that the long-term national funds, such as those
         administered by the Government Institution Pension Fund (GIPF), should
         play in the development of the market, without compromising the funds'
         returns or being detrimental to the rest of the market. In this regard, a study
         on which the strategy is to be formulated should be carried out by an independent
         consultant.

    ix. The amended regulations 15 and 28, which stipulate domestic asset
         requirements of long-term insurance companies and pension funds,
         respectively, shall be reviewed and effectively implemented. Amongst others,
         the amendments will require mandatory investment in "unlisted investments" as well
         as a requirement that these institutions should invest a minimum of 35% in Namibia.
         This will ensure that there are funds available for local economic development.

    x. In view of the importance to have an enabling regulatory environment that
         facilitates financial markets deepening and development, the following shall
         be undertaken:

    (a) The Financial Institutions and Markets (FIM) Bill, which aims to be a flexible,
         potent and responsive piece of legislation shall be promulgated and
         implemented. This will replace the existing legislations and be able to address the
         dynamics of the modern financial sector.

    (b) The regulatory regime of Namibia shall be harmonised and collaboration
         amongst regulators strengthened/enhanced. Collaboration and coordination is
         especially important since financial groups are often regulated and/or supervised
         by more than one regulator; and in which case effective consultation needs to take
         place.

    (c) Before any regulation or new law is enacted there shall always be a
         consultative policy paper (comprehensive regulatory impact assessment)

21  Towards Achieving Vision 2030                                                              21
                                   Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

     with the aim to improve the quality of regulations in the country and make them
     cost-effective, compatible with economic growth objectives, job creation
     and competitiveness. This exercise will also aim to achieve greater regulatory
     alignment between government policies so as to avoid possible inconsistencies
     and enhance trade and investment that the country is striving to achieve.

(d) There will be continuous review and improvement in prudential standards.
     This will require that the regulators are up to date with latest international standards
     such as Basel II and those set by the International Association of Industry
     Supervisors; and adapt them to Namibia. The application of international best
     practices and standards is necessary to help ensure a stable integrated financial
     system, although it has to be ensured that international best practices must be
     adapted to local circumstances and conditions.

(e) For purposes of ensuring the provision of a more conducive climate to investors to
     start and operate local businesses, financial regulators shall strive to harmonise
     the regulations as well as be consistent in their approach on aspects that are
     under their mandate. This is envisaged to improve the ease of doing business in
     Namibia.

22  Towards Achieving Vision 2030                                                              22
    Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

    FINANCIAL SAFETY NET

    39. The recent financial crisis is not the first one to affect the global financial system.     Financial safety net is
         There have been many before this episode and there is no guarantee that the                important to limit the
         current one will be the last one. Historically financial crises have been precipitated     costs of crises when
         by bank failures, which spread and result in systemic failure of the financial system.     they occur

    40. To make financial system breakdowns less likely and to limit their costs if they
         occur, countries have financial safety nets in place. These nets are amalgams of
         policies including early warning systems, explicit or implicit deposit insurance, the
         central bank's lending of last resort, bank insolvency resolution procedures, and
         bank regulation and supervision.

    Current situation assessment and challenges

    41. At present the Bank of Namibia has in place early warning systems, but these can            There is limited financial
         still be enhanced to make them more robust in order to respond to the ever-evolving        safety net for the
         technological innovations in the financial system. NAMFISA has made provision for          banking sector
         a compensation scheme in the FIM Bill to cater for cases where regulated entities
         are unable to meet their obligations. Further, the Bank of Namibia has a lender of         Namibia needs a
         last resort policy in place aimed at lending support to needy banks, if and when           comprehensive and
         such banks request assistance from the central bank. However it should be noted            modern safety net
         that the efficacy of the current financial safety net regime has not been robustly         regime
         tested, as there have been no problem institutions in Namibia in recent years.

    42. The challenge facing the Namibian financial system with regard to financial safety
         nets is to develop a comprehensive and modern safety net regime that includes all
         elements that allows for early detection and limiting the impact of failing institutions.
         As such, below is the envisaged outcome.

    Outcome 2:

    Appropriate safety nets shall be put in place to protect depositors and to ensure
    and maintain financial stability.

    Strategies to achieve the outcome

    The following shall be undertaken in an effort to achieve the outcome:

    i. The feasibility and format of an appropriate deposit insurance and resolution
         scheme for Namibia shall be investigated and determined. The aim is to protect
         depositors in case of a bank experiencing financial distress such that the impact
         of bank failures on its depositors as well as the contagious impact of bank failures

23  Towards Achieving Vision 2030                                                                   23
                                  Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

    is minimised. Deposit insurance in the event of bank closures has the objective
    of ensuring that the reimbursements of depositors are carried out in an efficient,
    transparent, and speedy manner, in order to contain the risk of a bank run. This
    is considered to be relevant as its existence will provide confidence in the system
    and reduce the risk of a financial system crisis occurring. A resolution scheme
    will ensure that Systemically Important Financial Institutions should be required to
    make contributions that is based on the risk profile of such entities and that will
    serve towards the cost of resolution of such entities in the event of failure.

24  Towards Achieving Vision 2030                                                         24
    Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

    FINANCIAL INCLUSION

    43. The level of financial exclusion in Namibia is very high. The 2007 FinScope Survey      Financial inclusion is
         indicates that more than half of the Namibian bankable population is unbanked.         important due to its link
         SMEs have also experienced difficulties in obtaining financing from formal financial   to economic growth and
         institutions as evidenced by the Namibia Chamber of Commerce and Industry              stability of a country
         (NCCI) Survey of 2009. Given the negative impact that financial exclusion can have
         on the economy, Namibia will strive to reduce the exclusion rate through various
         means. As such, financial inclusion is defined as the process of ensuring access
         to financial services and timely and adequate credit where needed by vulnerable
         groups such as weaker sections (i.e. micro- and small enterprises) and low income
         groups, at an affordable cost.

    44. In addition to the establishment of an inter-ministerial Financial Inclusion Council
         that will provide policy direction and monitor the implementation of strategies to
         enhance financial inclusion in Namibia, below are other strategies, specific to each
         individual element of financial inclusion.

    CONSUMER FINANCIAL LITERACY AND PROTECTION                                                  Consumer protection
                                                                                                and financial literacy
    45. The importance of consumer protection and financial education stems from the            is important for the
         fact that consumers all over the globe are facing greater financial insecurity, given  economy
         the dynamism of the financial sector. This has also been evidenced by the recent
         global economic crisis that originated from problems in the financial sector. Low      There has not been
         consumer knowledge regarding rights, financial products and services; deficient        a fully functional
         protection mechanism and poor personal finance management can lead to adverse          consumer protection
         impacts on the national economy and its citizens. It is therefore important that the   law in Namibia, while the
         necessary infrastructure is put in place to protect consumers from unfair practices.   level of financial literacy
         Education and awareness are essential to ensure that the level of information and      has also been low
         guidance to the public is enhanced.

         Current situation assessment and challenges

    46. A review of the current status in as far as consumer protection is concerned shows
         that there has not been a fully functional consumer protection law and or policy in
         existence in Namibia. The current Bank of Namibia Act does not have a provision
         on consumer protection, though the Bank is in the process of developing recourse
         mechanisms, especially for the banking sector. NAMFISA has included provisions
         on consumer protection in its new Bill (the Financial Institutions and Markets Bill)
         which is yet to be promulgated. Further, the Competition Commission caters for
         the protection of consumers to a certain degree, while the Ministry of Trade and
         Industry has also established a Consumer Protection Unit, though the consumer
         protection law is not yet in place.

25  Towards Achieving Vision 2030                                                               25
    Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

47. In order for consumer protection to be effective, it should be accompanied by             Effective protection of
     consumer literacy on financial matters. In Namibia, the level of consumer and            consumers requires
     financial literacy among citizens, both old and young is insufficient. Being clearly     financially literate
     aware of the need to improve financial literacy in the country, various institutions     consumers
     have been offering public education through the media. These initiatives include
     activities undertaken by NAMFISA, BoN, while there are also consumer education
     and protection undertakings by financial institutions through the Namibian Financial
     Sector Charter (NFSC). The consumer literacy initiatives are thus largely fragmented,
     often brand-related and suffer from duplication, showing a lack of coordination and
     inefficient utilisation of resources on a country level. The effectiveness of these
     efforts is thus yet to be determined. An inter-agency working group, namely the
     Financial Literacy Initiative (FLI) consisting of stakeholder institutions led by the
     Ministry of Finance and assisted by GIZ has been set up with the objective to look
     at broader issues of consumer literacy. The FLI has since been in the process of
     developing a framework to that effect.

48. The FLI has identified the lack of up-to-date national baseline data that hinders
     assessment of progress achieved through various consumer education efforts;
     the non-existence of a clear policy framework that hampers the effectiveness and
     enforcement of efforts aimed at consumer literacy; as well as the non-inclusion
     of financial literacy in the Namibian formal education curriculum which does not
     enable learners to become financial literate during early stages of their lives, as
     some of the challenges in terms of consumer literacy efforts in Namibia.

49. The Strategy has identified the below to be the ideal outcome, for the consumer
     financial literacy and protection components of financial inclusion, after implementing
     relevant initiatives which are also outlined below.

Outcome 3(a):

Namibia shall have and implement a consumer protection legal framework in
the financial sector, which will ensure transparency and disclosure as well as
consumer complaints and redress mechanisms.

Strategies to achieve the outcome

To ensure a solution for consumer protection, the following will be embarked
upon:

i. Market conduct principles and oversight will be developed and benchmarked
     to international best practices to ensure consumer protection. To that effect,
     the Bank of Namibia will develop guidelines on the protection of consumers of
     banking services and encourage banks to incorporate such in their code of good
     banking practice, while NAMFISA also envisages setting up market conduct

26  Towards Achieving Vision 2030                                                             26
                                        Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021                27

          standards for the non-banking financial institutions. This is necessitated by the
          inherent information imbalance between financial service providers and consumers.
          Once in place, they will not only preserve confidence in the financial system but
          also encourage responsible dealings on the side of financial service providers.
          Consumers on the other hand are expected to play their part by making use of
          available information to choose wisely. Such market conduct codes and standards
          shall therefore aim to ensure transparency (such that customers know what they
          are getting into), fair treatment of customers and effective recourse for customer
          complaints.

    ii. In line with the undertaking by the voluntary Financial Sector Charter, a financial
          services complaints adjudicator shall be established where consumers of
          financial products and services would be able to launch complaints that cannot be
          settled by customers and their financial institutions and the adjudication for such
          can take place.

    iii. Consumers will be educated on their rights and obligations as well as the
          redress provisions, so as to ensure consumer activism in the market. Consumer
          education should thus also involve debt counseling for consumers of financial
          products so as to provide advisory services where needed and rehabilitate people
          who are over-indebted.

  Outcome 3(b):

    The national financial literacy rate shall be increased by 2020 from the baseline
    to be determined by FinScope 2011.

   Strategies to achieve the outcome

    The following will be put in place to increase the level of financial literacy in Namibia:

    i. A clear policy framework for the coordination of financial literacy initiatives will
          be developed. This will outline the type of financial literacy programmes to be put
          in place as well as the necessary institutional arrangements to implement financial
          literacy programmes. As such, encompassing financial literacy guidelines shall be
          developed, with various sub-programmes catering for specific target audiences
          and levels (in terms of the life cycle) of the different groups of the population. It is
          necessary to have targeted programmes in order to ensure maximum impact on
          the target groups.

    ii. A national baseline data on financial literacy shall be developed and updated
          regularly. This will assist in measuring progress made by the country in the area of
          financial literacy.

27 Towards Achieving Vision 2030
                                   Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

iii. Financial education shall increasingly be incorporated into the school
     curriculum so as to empower the would-be financial services consumers. It is a
     widely accepted view that empowering people with skills and knowledge while they
     are still young will lead to inculcating in them a sense of being responsible adults in
     future.

iv. The pledge by the industry voluntary Charter for financial institutions to
     invest 0.2 percent of after tax operating profits in consumer education, shall
     be one of the sources of funds for purposes of financial literacy. Other sources
     of funds for this purpose will have to be explored.

v. Mechanisms to monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of the financial literacy
     programmes will be put in place. Monitoring and evaluation is necessary so that
     corrective measures are implemented if programmes are found not to make the
     intended impact.

ACCESS TO FINANCIAL SERVICES AND PRODUCTS

50. Access4 to financial products and services plays an important role in economic
     growth and development of countries as it contributes to, among others, the
     reduction of poverty and inequality. However, many people worldwide still do not
     have access to financial services and products. This lack of access to financial
     services and products has potential to retard growth and development if not
     addressed and corrected. Some non-governmental organisations as well as saving
     and credit cooperatives have been trying to improve access to finance by rural
     people by running programmes especially in the microfinance field.

    Current situation assessment and challenges

51. Limited access to financial products and services in Namibia is well documented                         There is a high level of
     and has been recognised as one of the priority areas to be addressed in the                            financial exclusion in
     five-year national development plans (NDPs) and the Financial Sector Charter.                          Namibia
     According to the FinScope Namibia survey (2007), 51.7 percent of the Namibian
     population is financially excluded. The majority of financially excluded are in the
     rural areas. Some non-governmental organisations as well as saving and credit
     cooperatives have been trying to improve access to finance by rural people by
     running programmes especially in the microfinance field.

52. Apart from individuals, small and medium enterprises also face serious access                           The SME sector
     problems. The predicaments faced by the SMEs5 are two fold: they are considered                        is important for
                                                                                                            economic growth and
     too small for lending by the commercial banks, in the sense of their ability to repay                  employment creation
                                                                                                            and needs to be
4 Access to finance is hereby defined to refer to access to financial services and products as well access  supported
to financial service infrastructure which enables consumers to gain access to financial services and
products.
5 SMEs, in the Namibian context, shall be defined to include all micro-entrepreneurs as well, while it
would be ideal to review the existing definitions and determine the exact levels.

28  Towards Achieving Vision 2030                                                                           28
                                        Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021                29

          back the money borrowed and too large for lending by micro-lenders, in the sense
          that the amount required often exceeds the available credit limits.

    53. Financial service providers (banks in particular) have initiated efforts in order to
          address the lack of access to finance. The Development Bank of Namibia has been
          channelling funds for SME development through commercial banks. Moreover,
          commercial banks have established specialised branches dedicated to SME
          lending and have also initiated mentoring programmes in order to assist SMEs.
          Furthermore, the NFSC also addresses access issues and has defined principles
          related to products and contains commitments by financial institutions in respect
          of access.

    54. However, there are challenges that hamper access to financial services especially
          relating to rural people and SMEs. These include, but not limited to: high transaction/
          information costs; unmitigated risks, e.g., risk of default by borrowers; lack of
          appropriate collaterals; regulation, e.g., laws that do not allow financial institutions
          to offer certain products; oligopolistic bank market structure that inhibits innovation
          due to limited competitive pressure; and land tenure system that does not recognise
          assets such as houses in rural areas as collateral.

    55. The below has been identified as the ideal situation going forward.

  Outcome 4(a):

    Improved access to financial services and products by eligible Namibians by
    reducing lack of access from the current baseline of 51.7 percent to 26 percent.

   Strategies to achieve the outcome

    The below strategies shall be embarked upon to enhance access to financial
    services and products to the underserved and vulnerable segments of the society.
    The implementation of these, together with the access principles outlined in the
    voluntary sector Charter should be able to increase the level of financial inclusion
    in Namibia.

    i. The level of exclusion of economic active Namibians from the use of financial
          services and products shall be determined by FinScope 2011 so as to
          have an updated indication and assess whether or not there had been an
          improvement after the 2007 FinScope survey indicated an exclusion rate of
          51.7 percent. To enable implementation of appropriate and targeted policies, such
          an assessment will have to be detailed such that it provides information on all

29 Towards Achieving Vision 2030
                                      Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021               30

        indicators that measure access, such as those suggested by relevant international
        bodies like the Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI) and Consultative Group to Assist
        the Poor (CGAP).

  ii. The Credit Agreements Act (which is viewed to be out-dated as it is almost
        30 years old) shall be revised so as to capture newer financing instruments;
        modernize collateral laws and enhance the balance between both debtor's and
        creditor's rights. The revised legislation will encompass all facets of access,
        including stronger implementation guidelines.

  iii. The determination of usury rate thresholds that differentiate between the
        loans provided by commercial banks and those by microfinance institutions
        shall be reviewed and aligned with international best practices. In this regard,
        a policy paper shall be produced with appropriate recommendations.

  iv. The regulation on electronic money (e-money) shall be issued in an effort to
        enhance access to financial services. The regulation will provide clear guidance
        to those wanting to provide such services while protecting the funds of the Namibian
        citizens who would use these services.

  v. The action plans under the National Payment System (NPS) Vision 2015 that
        aims to set clear standards for fees and charges as well as other activities
        resulting from the outcome of the Study on fees and user charges, will be
        implemented to achieve financial inclusion, efficiency and cost-effectiveness in the
        provision of low cost financial services. This will address the issue of high fees and
        charges that has characterised the Namibian financial system and has to some
        extent led to financial exclusion of some Namibians not being able to take up
        financial products and services offered by the sector.

  vi. In recognition of the need to overcome barriers to financial access, such
        as collateral requirements, ways and methods that have proven successful
        elsewhere will be explored. For example, the possibility of registering movable
        collateral as done in countries such as China as well as the successful financial
        support for SMEs in India and Bangladesh would be investigated. Furthermore,
        the current land tenure system that renders land in communal areas not to qualify
        as collateral security (mainly due to insecure land rights) could be reviewed with a
        view to enhance access to credit.

  vii. The Banking Institutions Act shall be amended to make specific provision
        for microfinance deposit-taking institutions whose mission will be to serve
        the poor and low income communities as well as microenterprises that are
        currently not having access to formal financial services.

  viii. A national venture capital fund (risk facility) would be considered to help
        increase the financing options for start-up projects in the economy, including

30 Towards Achieving Vision 2030
                                        Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021              31

          feasibility studies. Once established, this fund would also take advantage of the
          regulations 15 and 28 that intends making funds available for unlisted investments.

    ix. Efforts shall be directed to ensuring the availability of micro-insurance
          products in the country. This is necessary because due to their low asset bases,
          low-income people are particularly vulnerable to risk and negative external shocks
          (e.g. natural disaster, illness and/or death of main breadwinner, etc.). The existence
          of micro-insurance products will reduce such vulnerability and mitigate the negative
          effects associated with external shocks on poor households.

    x. The inherent conflict between financial integrity and financial access shall
          be guarded to ensure a good balance. Access to financial services could be
          affected by the Anti Money Laundering (AML) legislation and thus consideration
          should be given to reduce access requirements to low risk customers (who in
          most cases are low income customers), so that access is made possible without
          compromising the stability of the financial system.

  Outcome 4(b):

    Namibia shall have effective institutions in place that will provide sufficient
    support to SMEs and offer adequate products, services and knowledge to
    increase access to finance.

   Strategies to achieve the outcome

    The following shall be put in place to ensure SMEs get the necessary support and
    access financing:

    i. There shall be consideration given to whether there is a need to revise the
          1997 SME Development Policy; so as to strengthen implementation and
          enforcement and to ensure improvement in SMEs access to finance. A
          revision to the policy might also be necessary to ensure that it is in line with the
          new thinking encompassing all facets of SME enterprise development, i.e.to be in
          line with the new paradigm with respect to SMEs financing and business support.
          As such, the revised policy could for instance, cover among others:
         · The creation of a one-stop unit for SME support that would spur the development
               of SMEs by providing advisory services, and other support programmes; and
               thus fill the existing gap with respect to the necessary business support for
               SMEs in terms of skills required to run a successful business. This unit would
               therefore serve as a "one-stop shop" for information and advisory services for
               all SMEs in Namibia.

31 Towards Achieving Vision 2030
                                   Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

ii. A study will be undertaken to determine the viability of a Credit Guarantee
     Scheme in Namibia as there may be a need for such to guarantee loans and
     improve access to finance for SMEs as well as shield the credit providing entities
     against the perceived/inherent default risk associated with SMEs.

iii. There shall be a legislation created to enable the establishment of a credit
     bureau. The creation of the law will be preceded by a study that will look
     at how such a credit bureau can be organized. The credit bureau will be an
     avenue for information about both positive and negative credit track records of
     individuals and SMEs and will thus allow a platform for information sharing among
     all entities supporting SMEs. As such, financiers and other credit grantors shall be
     able to retrieve credit information and ratings for credit evaluation which will lead
     to the reduction of the credit risk of lenders and prevent over-indebtedness on the
     side of borrowers. The Bureau could also incorporate an Invoice Clearing function
     to enable a platform for validating invoices flowing into the Namibian economy.
     Entrepreneurs, especially SMEs that engage in tender based activities, will stand to
     benefit from invoice clearing as it will enhance and facilitate easy access to working
     capital.

iv. A specialised SME bank shall be created to cater for the financial needs of
     viable SME projects/businesses.

v. It will be investigated how best the existing various initiatives (such as the
     existence of funds/programmes, which are housed under several ministries,
     aimed at assisting small entrepreneurs (micro, small and medium enterprises
     (MSMEs)), can be coordinated so as to yield optimum results.

vi. The mandate of the Namibia Post Savings Bank (NAMPOST Bank) could be
     reviewed to enhance its contribution to financial inclusion. This will be done
     to enable the NAMPOST Bank to extend the required services, given its already
     established extensive branch network country wide.

vii. All credit providing entities such as DBN and commercial banks, as well as
     other financial institutions shall be encouraged to provide SME advisory
     services and/or make use of other bodies that provide such services and lend to
     priority sectors.

32  Towards Achieving Vision 2030                                                            32
    Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

    LOCALISATION OF THE NAMIBIAN
    FINANCIAL SECTOR

    56. Financial intermediation plays an important role in economic development,
         therefore, it is essential that financial institutions are owned and controlled by locals
         as locals are better suited to respond to the needs of the country.

    Current situation assessment and challenges

    57. The Namibian financial services sector has been historically characterised by               There is low
         dominance of foreign ownership. Most of the financial service providers operating          participation by
         in the country are majority owned by South African parent companies, with no               Namibians in
         or very little local ownership. There is a need to have a mix of locally owned and         ownership, control and
         foreign owned institutions so as to ensure the developmental needs of the country          management of local
         are addressed. Usually local institutions would be familiar with the needs of the          financial institutions, a
         country and would be attracted to making a contribution to its developmental               situation that needs to
         needs.                                                                                     be addressed.

    58. The sector is further characterised by low numbers of indigenous/previously
         disadvantaged Namibians in management positions. This phenomenon has been
         in the past attributed to low skill levels among previously disadvantaged Namibians.
         In order to address this deficit, there is a need to implement human resource
         development programmes so as to ensure that there is a strong pool of Namibians
         with the requisite skills to work in the financial sector.

    59. The Government has constantly urged the financial sector to transform in order to
         become more inclusive. The financial sector has heeded Government's call and
         adopted a voluntary Charter for the sector which spells out the sector's transformation
         agenda. It is expected that the industry will carry out the commitments as given in
         the Charter in order to achieve transformation.

    60. As per the agenda set out in the National Development Plans and the Government's
         New Equitable Economic Empowerment Framework (NEEEF) and in line with the
         transformation agenda of the Financial Sector Charter, it is important that the
         NFSS, being the main guiding document on the development of the financial
         sector, leads to genuine transformation of the sector. Identified under outcome 5(a)
         and (b) below is the ideal situation for Namibia.

33  Towards Achieving Vision 2030                                                                   33
                                   Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

Outcome 5(a):

There shall be increased Namibian ownership of financial institutions.

Strategies to achieve the outcome:

In line with and in addition to the provisions under NEEEF and the undertaking by
the voluntary Namibia Financial Sector Charter (NFSC) to improve and/or reduce
the inequitable distribution of ownership and control of financial institutions through
transformation, the strategies below aim to consider a much wider scope of ensuring
increased ownership of financial institutions by Namibians with the emphasis on
institutional ownership.

i. Regulators will recommend to the Minister of Finance to issue the appropriate
     level of Namibian ownership of financial institutions under their respective
     jurisdictions. This could be achieved through a relevant regulatory framework.

Outcome 5(b):

There shall be significant representation of Namibians at Board and management
level of financial institutions.

Strategies to achieve the outcome

In order to ensure the attainment of this outcome, the following will be
implemented:

i. Regulators will monitor the implementation of the provisions under various
     initiatives, such as the NEEEF, NFSS as well as the sector voluntary Charter
     and advise the Minister of Finance accordingly.

34  Towards Achieving Vision 2030                                                        34
    Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

    SKILLS DEVELOPMENT IN THE
    FINANCIAL SECTOR

    61. A well-functioning financial sector is essential for economic development.                  Skilled human resources
         Importantly, a robust financial sector, however, depends not only on the effective         important for financial
         institutional infrastructure, but also on the capability of its human resources. Human     sector development
         capital plays a critical role in the growth and development of the financial sector.
         Investments in human capital is instrumental in shaping the improvements to the
         financial services industry where knowledge, skill, competencies and capabilities
         have become key strategic drivers of productivity, competitiveness and growth.

    62. With globalisation and integrated financial markets, the need for capacity
         development in any countries' financial sectors becomes even more important
         to ensure that professionals within the sector will be able to keep up with the
         dynamism and expectations of the new developments. In the next decade, there
         are likely to be many changes in the type of skills needed by the financial services
         industry. New roles will be created and existing roles modified or expanded. As
         such, it is crucial that the financial services sector constantly improve the quality
         of its workforce and ensure an adequate supply of qualified human capital. This
         is because employees working at all levels in financial services organisations will
         need relevant skills in the new and changing environment. Examples of such
         skills that will be needed are: risk management and compliance skills, which will
         be driven by greater regulation of financial services companies and demand for
         transparency among stakeholders; product knowledge and advice skills so as for
         financial institutions to be able to assist and provide advice on the `new generation
         products' to the less affluent clients; and cultural and language skills which will
         become more important as financial services are extended more and more to the
         previously excluded and less fortune segments of the population, and as the client
         base becomes more diverse and sophisticated and which will raise the need to
         engage in specialized financial transactions.

         Current situation assessment and challenges                                                There is a lack of
                                                                                                    appropriate skills in
    63. One area of concern in the Namibian economy cited by many players in the financial          the Namibian financial
         sector is the lack of appropriate skills and this has restrained to a great extent         sector
         innovations and aggressive entrepreneurship. It has further resulted in a lack of
         meaningful representation of Namibians on the board and executive management
         structures of financial institutions.

    64. This has been the case despite tertiary institutions having produced graduates
         since independence, i.e. despite courses offered by existing tertiary institutions,
         many still lack skills needed to work in the financial sector. This might be a reflection
         of the general lack of skills to the requirements of the job market experienced by
         the country as was found by surveys carried out by the Ministry of Labour in 2006,

35  Towards Achieving Vision 2030                                                                   35
            Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

     followed by that of NEF/IPPR in 2010, both of which revealed the existence of         There is a need to
     vacancies hard to fill due to skills and qualification shortages. It was clear from   develop the current and
     the surveys that Namibia is experiencing a shortage of skilled workers. Also while    future skills required by
     Namibia has managed to maintain a middling position over the last few years on        the sector
     the global Competitiveness' Index of the World Economic Forum, the country is
     ranked very low in terms of innovation and the availability of specialised skills.

65. All of the above calls for both the government and the private sector to make
     concerted efforts to enhance the country's human resource development with the
     view to improve skills, especially in the areas of finance and entrepreneurship.

Outcome 6:

Skills needed by the financial sector shall be identified and developed.

Strategies to achieve the outcome:

In line with, and in addition to the provisions under the Government's education and
training sector improvement programme (ETSIP) as well as the undertaking by the
Namibia Financial Sector Charter to build and develop skills needed by the financial
sector, the following strategies will be implemented:

i. A sector Skills and Training Plan, proposed to be called the Financial Sector
     Skills Enrichment Programme, shall be designed which will have the objective
     to address the shortage of skills in the financial services industry and produce
     highly trained industry professionals. The programme will be funded by the financial
     industry players and regulators, while other sources of funds, including initiatives
     such as the newly introduced skills levy will be explored.

ii. To match up with changes and new developments in the financial sector,
     existing courses offered by tertiary institutions such as the Polytechnic
     of Namibia and University of Namibia will be reviewed to determine their
     relevance and adequacy, and if found not to meet the requirements of the sector,
     relevant courses and/or modules will be developed in conjunction with those
     institutions. The courses so developed will also address the strategic skills demand
     of stakeholders in the financial sector.

iii. Various professional qualification institutes, including the Institute of Bankers
     (IOB) in Namibia shall be strengthened to build up the skills of financial sector
     professionals (bankers, insurers, securities brokers and issuers, and accountants
     and auditors, among others); while also building up the capacity of financial sector
     professional associations. This will help develop the infrastructure, institutions,
     systems and processes required to support expanding financial markets. Partnering
     with institutions of high learning should also be considered.

36          Towards Achieving Vision 2030                                                  36
                                        Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

    iv. As a short-term solution, the financial sector will engage relevant authorities,
         such as the Ministry of Home Affairs, on putting in place a strategy pertaining
         to the acquisition of work permits for foreign employees with critical skills.
         The strategy will aim to allow the import of skilled persons where needed, as
         has happened in other developing countries, as well as to ensure that skills so
         imported result in skills transfer to Namibians. The long-term solution, which
         should be a top priority of the industry, however, is to train more people and have
         the needed local skills.

37  Towards Achieving Vision 2030                                                             37
                                   Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021          Monitoring and
                                                                                         evaluation is key
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENT,                                                               for successful
MONITORING AND EVALUATION OF                                                             implementation of the
THE NFSS                                                                                 Strategy

66. The Strategy shall be owned by the Government of the Republic of Namibia,
     under the custody of the Ministry of Finance.

67. Monitoring and evaluation will be vital to ensure the successful implementation of
     the Strategy. As such, an Implementing Committee consisting of the Permanent
     Secretary of the Ministry of Finance, the Governor of the Bank of Namibia and
     Chief Executive Officer of NAMFISA shall be set up to ensure the implementation
     of the NFSS.

68. To facilitate a smooth implementation process, Working Groups shall be created
     where relevant, identifying lead agencies and other stakeholders to be involved
     in the implementation of a strategy/specific action plan.

69. Given the special nature of the reform areas relating to financial inclusion as set
     out in this NFSS, there shall be established a Financial Inclusion Council, which
     will be responsible for the implementation of the financial inclusion agenda. The
     Council will be chaired by the Prime Minister of the Republic of Namibia, with
     Ministers/Heads of the following Ministries/Institutions as members:

(a) Ministry of Finance
(b) Ministry of Trade and Industry
(c) National Planning Commission
(d) Ministry of Education
(e) Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Forestry
(f) Ministry of Youth and Sport
(g) Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare
(h) Ministry of Gender Equality and Child Welfare, and
(i) Ministry of Information, Communication and Technology

70. An Advisory Body to the Council shall be formed, composing of relevant
     institutions, agencies and/or bodies, members of which shall be allowed to
     attend meetings of the Council. The Head of the following institutions will form
     the Advisory Body:

38  Towards Achieving Vision 2030                                                        38
                                        Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

    (a) Bank of Namibia
    (b) NAMFISA
    (c) Development Bank of Namibia
    (d) Agricultural Bank of Namibia
    (e) Namibia Post Ltd (NAMPOST)
    (f) Social Security Commission
    (g) Namibia Competition Commission
    (h) Bankers Association of Namibia
    (i) Non-banking industry Representative:

              Association of Asset Managers
              Association of retirement funds
              Association of Long-term Insurers
              Association of Short-term Insurers
    (j) Namibia Consumer Trust
    (k) Namibia Chamber of Commerce and Industry
    (l) Joint Consultative Council
    (m) Namibia Business Innovation Centre
    (n) Institute of Bankers in Namibia

    71. The Implementing Committee referred to in paragraph 67 above shall report
         to the Minister of Finance and to the Prime Minister in the case of financial
         inclusion matters, on a half yearly basis, who in turn will report the progress of
         implementation to Cabinet.

39  Towards Achieving Vision 2030                                                            39
       Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

Notes

40     Towards Achieving Vision 2030                 40
    Namibia Financial Sector Strategy: 2011-2021

Development Competitive  Effective  Resilient     Inclusive

41  Towards Achieving Vision 2030                 41
mDeeeomEvveCeeseCcRvvslcttmfuiceIoempfniseviefileDeioRnCplolvfveuesvtRilupiEeteveneeocilmeepemseeiescoDviRselmvtcetfnenEploitevisiCtfemuileplvttseipDtneitviomfEnpRteiteiiveIselofivveviieenctpilpeDtvletemfnniReeCiIoeeeemtfivttecneDevcvmtieDtsneiiIp4lenteCoetvnlnecotetRpiucievit2EsReitvmlieenvmCtcIlltoEpivDtseevouneeievilefniellIveiEmmfoieeCfvltiupspIscenenevofteResineefmnletisilenvcltemoEopEenvpficluioceRlictvieCettliemepvfnettpmfsulEpseiDeIRetfceuilftnneottvomeiiCesienimfInDpvvtseilIseventfcetmcipnitcttDeeeoEivvievieCenseiCcllevvtcttmuiceeIemtpfniitevieilIenDeoRnCvlolvifvusntRilutEeteveneeotDecimeepimeeisCocDvRvselvtcetfnnEploieviseiCfemlueileplvottsepetuetviRomfEpReitviieIselofivvemvsieesncpilpDleetmfeniReeCiEIoeeeemitfiivttecnDelclvvmsipeDtsneiiioplfenteoetvnlecoteetfipiucieevitlEsRpeitvmleieenvmCtnIltpivDtseevtuneieDvicemfntietilIveEmoieeCfvlttipsIcnenevtoteReseiineefmnlietviClevNcIlteoEovEenvpficuviocneRletnveCetlaeimepfonttepmfsulEpsceiDIReftcmeiulftnnotvmlomeiCesielnimfDopvEtselIsueveiRtfcemicipnitbcteeeoEiPpvveivFepCefnsseillevitecttfmuiiranceeTIemtspmfiniitevieeiiIenDoRnvvvlslvifvcsonttilutFEetaetenceeoutDeecimieepieweeiiCotcDviRvslsvttcttnfennplIonevseiCifiaemluDeinCaepotBvtevetuBetvRmErpReittviiTnIscluodeeFvvemvaseiesncoepiDlectmfeiiRMaeeCgsEIolleeeelmitfviivdCtc:muinexllvvsipeaDsneiiio1ipAfleEn+Rtee:onevnnlescotleefipiuci3evt2i+pglEcsRpeitvlmlesefnmStnieilt2opiD6t2sef,vettheueieDevicmfret9eietsil4Iv61EpmyiieeCfvlttipnsInenee5ctvtoeR40eciseiine6ieomfnliet,vvitCtevcIltetoEivDnevpfict1ovi6JofcneieWiletnveCneitlveoim1Ferfontteevmu2lEpIsceeiDIRgeftcihuilitnenSnno0etv2mnloeCsilnvinmfDopEdtelaIsuev9eVc3tRfcemictipniCertnheMeoEpv0vievepCifnsselEa9lesvRcoteculfm1unceeoemtetp1omfiiiCiteveeefIenoRoev7vlslifsies1nttf,ilknutmEepetence9gneotDeeeimi1pii,eeeisiCcDvlRvvslvyttcttmfnniNrpcIo2pnieseiiefiet:leDeinCeplotvtevetueatv0tRimpSitt2eviineIecilmeevvemvs3eienscoDvit0DetmtetnRerCnEIle0eeeitiviieiCt1cemubnllvvtseipDtneiieolfeEnRte1ioeivleIsacoeeofitvpviuevnt-plEsRpetvleefnmniReCilop2eemsefveteucieDevcmfteet0silIEplemieCfolttipnlsneotvto2eRpueciseiiEsimflietviCtecIlte1toEpivDenvpfictsevioneeiilefnveitllveimemfonitteefvmtiupIsceeiDnIvefteceiitnenetvmnletsilnvitemDopEneteclIueivcRceictviniCeteEpvnvetvtepCfnselEDleIRetecuilfunneeoemttvomfiiCtevefInoRvvsleifsesntfcleutmEeptecotDeeeomEipiviCeeisiCcllRvvslvtctmfuipcIoempfnieseiefileDeioRnCeplovtfveuesvtRilmpitteveineeocileepvemseieiescoDviDetmvtcetnenEIpleeiteviisiCtemunlelvvttseipDtneitiomfEnRteiteiiveIsceelofivvviievntpilRpeDtvletefnniReeCilIoeeeemefivteucneDevcvmteetsneiIEpleneColtnlsnecotetoRpuciseviEsRitmflievimCtecIlltoEpivDvpfitseevouneei4ilefneietllveiEmemfoi2eeCfvlmtiupspIsceeinvoftecesitneefmnletisilenvitemoDopEenvtpficlueivcRlictvieiCettieepvnvettepmfnselEeiDeIRetceciulftnneeottvomiiCtevenifInDvvtsleiIseventfceutmEepnitcttDeeeoEivivieCenseiCcllRvvslcttmfuiceoIempfniteviefilIeDeioRnClolvfveuesvtRilupEeteveneeocimeepemseeiescCoDvRselmvtcetfnnEploitevisiCtfemuileplvottseipeDteitviomfEpRteiteiiv
