BHUTAN ­ Rapid Integrated Assessment ­ October 2015

                  RAPID INTEGRATED ASSESSMENT ­ BHUTAN SDG PROFILE

UNDP conducted a rapid integrated assessment of Bhutan's 11th Five Year Plan (Volume I and II) against the
SDG targets. The assessment provides a gap analysis of the SDG targets that are not prioritized in the current plan
and the targets that have been prioritized by multiple sectors. Sectors indicated are those listed in the 11th Five
Year Plan.

Template 1 provides a quick snapshot of integration/gap analysis and the SDG targets that are prioritized by

multiple sectors. For SDG targets prioritized by multiple sectors ­ it is expected that joint planning is conducted or
an assessment of impact and potential results be conducted with concerned sectors (to understand if cross-
sectoral interventions are mutually reinforcing).

                                                                                                                                          1
BHUTAN ­ Rapid Integrated Assessment ­ October 2015

Template 2 provides further details, including targets included in the government plan and corresponding

indicators for monitoring.

Following are key observations drawn from the assessment:

  1) There is a high level of integration of the SDG targets into the 11th national plan. 93 SDG targets have been
       prioritized out of 102, excluding targets related to SDG 14 on Oceans and SDG 17 on Means of
       Implementation. This is testament to the philosophy behind Bhutan's National Vision 2020 and the GNH
       approach which are closely in tune with the principles expressed in the 2030 SD Agenda.

  2) The assessment showed gaps related to the following SDG targets:
     SDG 5.4: Recognize and value unpaid care and domestic work through the provision of public services,
         infrastructure and social protection policies and the promotion of shared responsibility within the
         household and the family as nationally appropriate
     SDG 6.4: By 2030, substantially increase water-use efficiency across all sectors and ensure sustainable
         withdrawals and supply of freshwater to address water scarcity and substantially reduce the number of
         people suffering from water scarcity
     SDG 8.10: Strengthen the capacity of domestic financial institutions to encourage and expand access to
         banking, insurance and financial services for all
     SDG 10.5: Improve the regulation and monitoring of global financial markets and institutions and
         strengthen the implementation of such regulations
     SDG 10.6: Ensure enhanced representation and voice for developing countries in decision-making in
         global international economic and financial institutions in order to deliver more effective, credible,
         accountable and legitimate institutions
     SDG 10.7: Facilitate orderly, safe, regular and responsible migration and mobility of people, including
         through the implementation of planned and well-managed migration policies
     SDG 11.7: By 2030, provide universal access to safe, inclusive and accessible, green and public spaces, in
         particular for women and children, older persons and persons with disabilities
                                                                                                                                          2
BHUTAN ­ Rapid Integrated Assessment ­ October 2015

     SDG 12.3: By 2030, halve per capita global food waste at the retail and consumer levels and reduce food
         losses along production and supply chains, including post-harvest losses

     SDG 15.4: By 2030, ensure the conservation of mountain ecosystems, including their biodiversity, in order
         to enhance their capacity to provide benefits that are essential for sustainable development

  3) Overall, while gender is well addressed in the NDP, an important gap is the recognition and value of
       unpaid care and domestic work through the provision of public services, infrastructure and social
       protection policies as nationally appropriate (SDG 5.4). The feminization of agriculture has been identified
       as one of the main challenges to agriculture growth. However, the NDP (vol I and Vol II) does not include
       targets to improve agricultural production that focus on technological empowerment, unmediated control
       and ownership of land, enhancing of agricultural management skills and knowledge of women in
       agriculture.

  4) The NDP does not appear to contain explicit reference to `mountain ecosystems' (SDG 15.4). As Bhutan is a
       mountainous country, the work on ecosystems and biodiversity (reflected in the NDP) most likely also
       relates to mountain ecosystems. This would perhaps need to be discussed.

  5) There is no mention of promoting safe and secure working environments for migrants and those in
       precarious employment. This may need to be discussed to better align the NDP with SDG 8 on inclusive
       growth and employment (target 8.8).

  6) Regarding social protection (SDG 1.3), there is only a mention of developing a social protection policy for
       private sector employees. Given that 12% of Bhutan's population is poor and mostly concentrated in rural
       areas, this may need to be looked into.

  7) The NDP notes several challenges in increasing the access of small-scale industrial and other enterprises
       to financial services, including affordable credit, and their integration into value chains and markets (SDG
       9.3). Challenges include limited access to finance by the Cottage and Small Industries, difficulty to access
       viable markets, limited industrial infrastructure, limited entrepreneurial talent/skills, use of outmoded
       technology, high transportation costs, low economy of scale and, poor R&D and innovation culture among
       enterprises.

  8) Given the complexity, the assessment did not cover most of the targets related to SDG 17 on Means of
       Implementation, with the exception of the targets related to Trade. SDG 17 on means of implementation
       will need to be looked into more carefully on areas related to finance (ODA and domestic resources),
       technology (transfer of technology, North-South and South-South Collaboration), capacity-building,
       partnerships (public-private and civil society partnerships), and data, monitoring and accountability issues.

  9) The assessment identified various cross-sectoral linkages and these have been detailed in template 2. It
       may be good to discuss whether there is collaboration between these sectors in their planning and
       implementation of actions and how their interventions complement each other's plan. While the
       assessment tried to identify as many cross-sectoral linkages, there may be additional linkages that may
       need to be identified for effective SDG implementation. This would need to be discussed.

  10) Bhutan's Mainstreaming Reference Group is tasked with strengthening and facilitating the integration of all
       cross cutting issues (Climate Change, Environment, Disaster, Gender and Poverty) into the government's
       decision-making processes and development policies, plans and programmes. What is their envisioned role
       in implementation of the SDG's? Would they also cover other areas?

                                                                                                                                          3
