                                                  KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA
                                                   NATION RELIGION KING

                                3

 NEARY RATTANAK IV

            FIVE YEAR STRATEGIC PLAN
FOR GENDER EQUALITY AND WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT

          2014-2018
  NEARY RATTANAK IV

               FIVE YEAR STRATEGIC PLAN
  FOR GENDER EQUALITY AND WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT

           2014-2018

MINISTRY OF WOMEN'S AFFAIRS
FOREWORD

Neary Rattanak IV is the five-year strategic plan (2014 ­ 2018) for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women in
Cambodia. On behalf of the Cambodian Women Machinery (the Ministry of Women's Affairs and the Cambodian National
Council for Women) I would like to inform that:

In accordance with the current situation in the country and Phase III of the Rectangular Strategy for Growth,
Employment, Equity and Efficiency, the Ministry of Women's Affairs, in partnership with relevant ministries/institutions
and other partners, has developed the strategic plan Neary Rattanak IV to continue the government's efforts to promote
gender equality and the empowerment of women in Cambodia. The strategic plan has been prepared based on the
lessons learned and results of the implementation of Neary Rattanak III as well as the findings and recommendations
of the Cambodia Gender Assessment 2014. It reflects the vision of the Ministry of Women's Affairs (MoWA) for the next
five years with a particular focus on MoWA's long-term institutional strengthening and capacity development to fulfill our
mandate as strategic gender policy advisor and facilitator with line ministries at national and sub-national levels. Neary
Rattanak IV aims to support the reform process of the Ministry of Women's Affairs to move from project-based activities to
a Program-Based Approach, and promoting MoWA's role in providing effective gender analysis, institutional advocacy and
policy advice across the entire Government.

Neary Rattanak IV is a policy instrument to foster gender mainstreaming in key government reform programs such as
Decentralization and Deconcentration Program, Public Administration Reform, Public Financial Management Reform,
Legal and Judicial Reform, and Land Reform. It also reflects the contributions and linkages to the implementation of
national plans, policies and targets including the Cambodian Millennium Development Goals; the National Strategic
Development Plan 2014-2018; the Education for All Policy; the Second National Action Plan to Prevent Violence Against
Women; the National Action Plan on the Suppression of Human Trafficking and Sexual Exploitation; the Social Security
Policy; the MDG Acceleration Framework; the sectoral Gender Mainstreaming Action Plans; and the annual plans of the
Cambodian National Council for Women. Moreover, Neary Rattanak IV responds to priority development issues in
Cambodia, and incorporates regional and international cooperation agreements and commitments such as the CEDAW
Concluding Observations.

The development of this strategic plan included a comprehensive consultation, cooperation, and partnership process
with line ministries/institutions and other stakeholders at both the national and sub-national levels, including develop-
ment partners and NGOs. This process resulted in a broad-based and inclusive strategy which addresses the challenges for
achieving gender equality and the full participation of women in Cambodia's society.

It is my sincere hope that line ministries, other government institutions, civil society organizations and development
partners will continue their support and valued cooperation for the successful implementation of the Neary Rattanak IV,
for the benefit of our nation as a whole.

NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018  1
2 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
CONTENTS

FOREWORD ............................................................................................................................................................. 1
CONTENTS .............................................................................................................................................................. 3
ACRONYMS.............................................................................................................................................................. 4
BACKGROUND......................................................................................................................................................... 6
KEY ACHIEVEMENTS AND CHALLENGES ................................................................................................................ 7
PART I: VISION AND MISSION................................................................................................................................ 14
PART II: OBJECTIVES............................................................................................................................................. 15
PART III: STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK ....................................................................................................................... 16

    1. Economic Growth ....................................................................................................................................... 16
    2. Access to Social Services and Protection .................................................................................................. 17
    3. Cross-Cutting Issues ................................................................................................................................... 20
    4. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Development towards Gender Equality ............................... 23
PART IV: ACTION PLAN.......................................................................................................................................... 25
PART V: FINANCIAL RESOURCES .......................................................................................................................... 63
PART VI: MONITORING AND EVALUATION ............................................................................................................ 64

NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018                                                                                                                                                3
ACRONYMS

ASEAN     Association of South East Asian Nations
CCWC      Commune Committee for Women and Children
CCCS      Committee for Climate Change Secretariat
CCCSP     Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan
CCD/MoE   Climate Change Department, Ministry of Environment
CDB       Commune Database
CDC       Council for the Development of Cambodia
CDHS      Cambodia Demographic and Health Survey
CEDAW     Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women
CGA       Cambodia Gender Assessment
CMDG      Cambodia Millennium Development Goal
CNCW      Cambodian National Council for Women
CSO       Civil Society Organization
CWEA      Cambodian Women Entrepreneurs' Association
D&D       Decentralization and De-concentration
DOWA      District Office of Women's Affairs
DP        Development Partner
GDCC      Government-Donor Coordination Committee
GBV       Gender-based Violence
GII       Gender Inequality Index
GMAG      Gender Mainstreaming Action Group
GMAP      Gender Mainstreaming Action Plan
HIV/AIDS  Human immunodeficiency virus/Acquired immune deficiency syndrome
HSS       HIV Sentinel Surveillance
HSSP      Health Sector Support Program
IEC       Information, Education and Communication
ILO       International Labour Organization
IP3       (3-year) Implementation Plan
JMI       Joint Monitoring Indicator
LGBT      Lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender
LM        Line Ministry
M&E       Monitoring and Evaluation
MAF       MDG Acceleration Framework
MAFF      Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
MDG       Millennium Development Goal
MEF       Ministry of Economy and Finance
MFI       Micro-Finance Institution
MIME      Ministry of Industry, Mines and Energy
MLMUPC    Ministry of Land Management, Urban Planning and Construction
MMR       Maternal Mortality Rate
MoCS      Ministry of Civil Service
MoE       Ministry of Environment
MoEYS     Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport
MoH       Ministry of Health
MoI       Ministry of Interior
MoIn      Ministry of Information
MoJ       Ministry of Justice
MoLVT     Ministry of Labour and Vocational Training
MoP       Ministry of Planning
MoSVY     Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation
MoT       Ministry of Tourism

4 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
MoC        Ministry of Commerce
MoWA       Ministry of Women's Affairs
MRD        Ministry of Rural Development
MSME       Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise
NAA        National AIDS Authority
NAPVAW     National Action Plan to Prevent Violence against Women
NCCC       National Climate Change Committee
NCDD       National Committee for Sub-National Democratic Development
NCDM       National Committee for Disaster Management
NCGG       National Committee for Green Growth
NEC        National Election Committee
NEP        National Employment Policy
NGO        Non-governmental Organization
NIS        National Institute of Statistics
NPA-STSLS  National Plan of Action for the Suppression of Human Trafficking, Smuggling, Labour & Sexual Exploitation
NP-SNDD    National Program for Sub-national Democratic Development
NR IV      Neary Rattanak IV
NSDP       National Strategic Development Plan
PAR        Public Administration Reform
PBA        Program-based Approach
PBA C/S    PBA Committee and Secretariat
PDWA       Provincial Department of Women's Affairs
PFMRP      Public Financial Management Reform Program
OS-WEE     Operational Strategy for Women's Economic Empowerment
RGC        Royal Government of Cambodia
RSA        Royal School of Administration
SNA        Sub-national Administration
SNDD       Sub-national Democratic Development
SRH        Sexual and Reproductive Health
TVET       Technical and Vocational Education and Training
TWG        Technical Working Group
TWG-G      Technical Working Group on Gender
TWG-G-GBV  TWG-G sub-group on Gender-based Violence
TWG-G-WEE  TWG-G sub-group on Women's Economic Empowerment
UNESCO     United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
WBA        Women's Business Association
WCCC       Women and Children Consultative Committee
WDC        Women's Development Centre
WEE        Women's Economic Empowerment

           NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018  5
BACKGROUND

The Ministry of Women's Affairs (MoWA) and the Cambodian National Council for Women (CNCW) are the national
machinery for the promotion of gender equality and women's empowerment in Cambodia. MoWA acts as a catalyst and
advocate to encourage public institutions, civil society and the private sector to integrate gender equality into their
policies and programs, and as a coordinator and facilitator for gender mainstreaming across government. It is responsible
for monitoring and evaluating policies and programs to assess their contribution to achieving the Government's goals in
promoting gender equality and the empowerment of women.
In 1999, MoWA prepared and implemented its first five-year strategic plan, called "Neary Rattanak". In 2013, MoWA in
partnership with line ministries and institutions at national and sub-national level reviewed the effectiveness and
efficiency of the implementation of the strategic plans "Neary Rattanak I-III" and developed "Neary Rattanak IV". This was
considered an important part of the Royal Government of Cambodia's (RGC) Rectangular Strategy of its fourth mandate,
along with the National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) 2014-2018.
Neary Rattanak IV will launch MoWA's transition from project-based activities to a program-based approach (PBA), and
from implementation and service delivery to promoting social accountability for women and providing high-level strategic
policy advisory services. With Cambodia's rapid economic development and a shift from least-developed to lower-middle-
income country status, comes rising inequalities and vulnerabilities of under-served groups and areas. Thus, the plan will
also mainstream issues related to vulnerability and disability, and include a sub-regional perspective, based on sub-
regionally disaggregated gender analysis by sector, to better understand where the most severe gaps are across the
country and target them with appropriate measures.
This fourth five-year strategic plan (Neary Rattanak IV) is designed to provide detailed action plans to support the transition
from project-based to program-based approaches, with a strong emphasis on building capacity of institutions across
government for gender equality.
This plan outlines the vision, mission, guiding principles, key goals, objectives and strategies to reach those goals, which
are designed as thematic programs. Underpinning the thematic programs is a comprehensive overarching Institutional
Strengthening and Capacity Development Framework that guides the approach and the process.
Neary Rattanak IV incorporates the key gender themes from the "Rectangular Strategy for Growth, Employment, Equity
and Efficiency, Phase III"1, the NSDP 2014-2018, the Draft Cambodia Millennium Development Goals (CMDG) Report 2013,
and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) Concluding Observations
on the fourth and fifth periodic report of Cambodia2.

1 Royal Government of Cambodia (2013) Rectangular Strategy for Growth, Employment, Equity and Efficiency, Phase III.
2 CEDAW Concluding Observations on the fourth and fifth periodic report of Cambodia, October 2013.

6 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
KEY ACHIEVEMENTS AND CHALLENGES

In relation to promoting gender equality and women's empowerment, "the backbone of economy and society," in the last
legislature of the national assembly, the RGC implemented Neary Rattanak III 2009-2013. This focused on increasing
opportunities at all levels: economic, social and governance. Gender was mainstreamed into the NSDP Update 2009-2013
with some specific target indicators for monitoring the implementation.

During the implementation of Neary Rattanak III, the RGC through MoWA, line ministries and development partners
achieved remarkable success in contributing to gender-responsive laws, policies and programs at national and sub-
national levels; the promotion of women's economic empowerment, including climate change and environment
management; the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women; the improvement of health and nutrition for
women and girls; the prevention of the HIV epidemic; the promotion of women's and girls' participation in education,
together with the promotion of social morality, women and family values; and the promotion of women's participation in
decision-making at all levels.

Women's Economic Empowerment

Cambodia is making good progress in women's economic empowerment. The RGC's long-term goal is to create jobs and
ensure improved working conditions3, which directly contributes to economic empowerment of women. The Gender
Inequality Index (GII) 2013 indicated that female participation in the labour market is 79.2 percent. In the Global Gender
Gap Index 2013 for economic participation, Cambodia scores quite high for labour force participation, but lower for
professional and technical workers4. The growth of trade, services and manufacturing, agriculture, hotels and
accommodation has increased jobs for women ­ accounting for 89 percent of all women's employment5. There have been
increased employment opportunities for both women and men, and a decrease in vulnerable employment. The poverty
rate dropped from 29.90 percent in 2008 to 19.80 percent in 20116.

The RGC has made regular efforts to provide economic opportunities for women and has enabled women to generate
incomes for their families. These efforts include establishing Women's Development Centres (WDC) in 13 provinces, which
play an important role in delivering business development services to women. Approximately 13,102 women have received
vocational skills at WDCs. The Cambodian Women Entrepreneurs' Association (CWEA) was established in 2012, comprising
150 members, for developing women's businesses and strengthening the voices of women entrepreneurs in the private
sector7.

The Millennium Development Goal Acceleration Framework (MAF) was developed to accelerate achieving CMDG Goal 3,
focusing on women's economic empowerment and mobilizing public institutions, the private sector and development
partners. Its three strategies are: 1) Strengthening vocational skills for women based on market demand; 2) Developing
micro, small and medium enterprises; and 3) Improving livelihoods in rural areas.

Despite great efforts and progress, there are challenges to be addressed:

 The wage employment sector offers many opportunities for women, but the benefits are curtailed by low wages, poor
     working conditions, a gap between demand and supply of available jobs, and ASEAN economic integration.

 There is lot of potential for women to create and expand micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs), but they have
     limited access to business-related services and resources, including finance. Most women-owned enterprises are
     informal and concentrated in less productive sectors.

 As income-earning opportunities are high in the domestic labour market and MSME sector, many women migrate from
     rural to urban areas, and to neighbouring countries, to find jobs. Generally, they face more risks than men, including
     physical abuse.

3 Royal Government of Cambodia, National Strategic Development Plan 2014-2018.

4 World Economic Forum, Global Gender Gap Index 2014, http://www.weforum.org/issues/global-gender-gap

5 National Institute of Statistics, Ministry of Planning (2013) Cambodia Inter-Censal Population Survey. Phnom Penh, Cambodia.

6 The new national poverty line is still a low estimate of the cost of survival as it is based on the cost of 2,200 calories and a small cost for non-food items;
      the new poverty line for Cambodia is 3,871 Riels/day (per capita) in 2009 prices, with higher poverty lines for Phnom Penh and other urban areas, and a
      lower line for rural areas (Ministry of Planning 2013a).

7 Royal Government of Cambodia, National Strategic Development Plan 2014-2018.

NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018      7
 There is limited effective cooperation between line institutions in delivering technical and vocational training and
     interventions to enable women to access job opportunities, or to promote women's entrepreneurship.

 There is a lack of cooperation between the public and private sectors to increase services of WDCs.

Education for Women and Girls and Attitudinal Change

Gender disparity in education has reduced at all levels, with more scholarships for poor students, especially girls, more
schools at the sub-national level, and more girls' dormitories.

Since 2008, gender has been mainstreamed in policies and plans in education and vocational training, including the
Education Strategic Plan (2009-2013); the Curriculum Development Master Plan (2010-2014); the Teacher Development
Master Plan (2010-2014); the Master Plan for Capacity Development in the Education Sector (2011-2015); the Gender
Mainstreaming Strategic Plan (2011-2015); the Policy on Human Resources in the Education Sector (2012); the Teacher
Policy (2013); the National Policy of Cambodia Youth Development (2011); the MoLVT Strategic Plan (2009-2013); and the
Social Marketing Strategy: Strategy for Gender Equity in TVET (2014-2018).

These laws, policies and plans have contributed to the promotion of gender equality in education and vocational training
through improved physical infrastructure, better access and opportunities for girls to education and training, better social
attitudes and favourable conditions for the participation of women at all levels and in all sectors. At the preschool level,
there have been gradual increases in the enrolment of both boys and girls over the last five years8, contributing to
children's increased levels of education and confidence in primary education and beyond. At the primary and secondary
levels, the enrolment of girls is equal to that of boys9. In 2012, more girls than boys enrolled in lower secondary education10.
In higher education, the proportion of female students has been increasing steadily, from 33 percent in 2008 to 37.6
percent in 201111. The proportion of girls in technical and vocational training has also increased.

The National Committee for Upholding Social Morality, Women's and Khmer Family Values has been implementing its
multi-sectoral work plan aimed at reducing anti-social behaviour and increasing mutual respect, particularly for women
and girls, ensuring harmony and happiness within the family and in the society as a whole. All relevant institutions at
national and sub-national levels have been working together to reduce violations of human rights and the rights of the
child, all forms of violence, human trafficking, theft/robberies and drug use.

Major challenges to expanding education and training opportunities for girls and women include:

 Negative social attitudes towards girls' education, illiteracy and low levels of parents' education, child marriage,
     domestic violence and opportunity costs of education.

 Child protection in schools remains limited, particularly for girls to travel safely to and from school, to be free from
     violence at school, and in terms of access to sanitation facilities.

 Community and parent engagement in school activities and children's education remains weak.

 Rapid industrial growth, ASEAN economic integration in 2015, together with the increasing level of materialism in
     society will drive the demand for skilled workers and will push young girls and boys into the labour market.

 Children of women who suffer gender-based violence12, girls with disabilities13, lesbian girls and trans-gender people14
     have higher school absence and drop-out rates, due to their personal and family situation and/or bullying from peers.

8 UIS online database. UNESCO Institute for Statistics. Available online at: data.uis.unesco.org
9 Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport, Education Management Information System (2008; 2009; 2010; 2011).
10 Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport, Education Management Information System (2012).
11 Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport, Education Management Information System (2008; 2009; 2010; 2011).
12 Ministry of Women's Affairs (2009) Violence Against Women, Follow Up Survey. Phnom Penh.
13 UNESCAP (2012) Disability, Livelihood and Poverty in Asia and the Pacific. Bangkok, Thailand; and Handicap International (2009) Briefing Paper: Disability

      Facts in Cambodia. Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
14 UNESCO (2012) Review of Homophobic Bullying in Educational Institutions. Paris, France; from Cambodian Center for Human Rights (2012) Rainbow

      Khmer: From Prejudice to Pride. Phnom Penh, Cambodia.

8 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
Gender and Health

The maternal mortality rate (MMR) decreased by more than half, from 472 per 100,000 live births in 2005 to 206 per 100,000
live births in 201015. Access to maternal health care also improved steadily over the same five years16. Positive trends
continue due to interventions by the Ministry of Health (MoH), other institutions and partners involved in increasing the
number of health care providers at health centres, education programs and outreach by village health workers.

Stunting reduced from 50 percent in 2000 to 40 percent in 2010. Wasting decreased from 17 percent in 2000 to 8 percent in
2005, and slightly increased to 11 percent in 2010. Underweight rates decreased from 39 percent in 2000 to 28 percent in
201017.

Information on reproductive and sexual health is important for youth to understand their reproductive and sexual rights.
In 2013, the RGC made a commitment to address this issue through the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport (MoEYS), by
adopting a comprehensive curriculum for youth in primary and secondary education, as well as for those outside school.
The curriculum includes information on reproductive and sexual health in relation to age, gender, gender-based violence,
drugs, life skills and HIV/AIDS.

Remaining challenges include:

 Lack of skilled service providers in remote areas and lack of adequate medicine and modern health equipment in
     health centres. Social, cultural and economic factors all contribute to low levels of awareness, access to information,
     and health care seeking behaviour among women. Poverty and domestic violence compound health issues for
     women and girls.

 Despite the impressive decrease in MMR, there are still significant inequities in pregnant women's access to health
     care, and maternal mortality remains high compared to other countries in the region. Contraceptive prevalence has
     gradually increased however unmet need remains high at 17 percent.18 Non-communicable diseases are emerging as
     a significant concern, and women face a lack of detection and treatment for cervical, ovarian and breast cancers.

 Lack of access to clean water and sanitation has a negative effect on the nutritional status of women.

 There is a 3.4 percent prevalence of blindness among women older than 50 years, compared to 2 percent of men in the
     same of age group19. There is no explanation for the difference between the prevalence of blindness among men and
     women; this requires further study and an expansion of services.

 Social and cultural barriers continue to be obstacles in many countries, including Cambodia, to speaking openly
     about sexual health issues, particularly between mothers and youth.

Gender and HIV

The rate of HIV among men and women aged 15 to 49 years decreased remarkably from 1.7 percent in 1998 to 0.7 percent
in 201420 (projection). This was due to a decrease in new infections through prevention efforts, especially among high-risk
groups, increased coverage of HIV blood tests, treatment with anti-HIV drugs and improved information services and
communication from ministries and stakeholders.

Cambodia achieved the universal goal of access to services for the treatment of women and men, girls and boys, with a rate
of up to 89.5 percent for the needy21. As a result of this achievement, the estimated deaths from AIDS and HIV transmission
from mother to child decreased significantly in recent years.

15 National Institute of Statistics, Ministry of Planning, Directorate General for Health, Ministry of Health (2010) Cambodia Demographic and Health Survey.
      Phnom Penh, Cambodia.

16 Wang, Wenjuan (2013) Assessing Trends in Inequalities in Maternal and Child Health and Health Care in Cambodia. DHS Further Analysis Reports No. 86.
      Calverton, Maryland, USA: ICF International.

17 National Institute of Statistics, Ministry of Planning, Directorate General for Health, Ministry of Health (2010) Cambodia Demographic and Health Survey.
      Phnom Penh, Cambodia.

18 National Institute of Statistics, Ministry of Planning, Directorate General for Health, Ministry of Health (2010) Cambodia Demographic and Health Survey.
      Phnom Penh, Cambodia.

19 Seiha, D. and Limburg, H. (2009) Report of the Rapid Assessment for Avoidable Blindness in Cambodia - 2007. National Program for Eye Health, Phnom
      Penh.

20 As projected in National Centre for HIV/AIDS, Dermatology and STIs (2011) HIV Estimates and Projections of HIV/AIDS in Cambodia 2011-2015: Report of a
      Census Workshop. Phnom Penh: Ministry of Health Surveillance Unit.

21 National AIDS Authority (2012a) Cambodia Country Progress Report 2012: Monitoring the Progress towards the Implementation of the Declaration of Com-
      mitment on HIV and AIDS. Phnom Penh.

NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018  9
With the participation of relevant line ministries, the National AIDS Authority prepared a third National Strategic Plan for
Comprehensive and Multi-Sectoral Response to HIV/AIDS (2011-2015), as well as training programs and guidelines on
gender mainstreaming in response to HIV/AIDS. MoWA also prepared a Strategic Plan on Women, the Girl Child and HIV/
AIDS (2008-2012), and training programs on mainstreaming the fight against HIV/AIDS in the process of promoting gender
equality.

Based on the Cambodia Gender Assessment 201422, challenges related to gender and HIV include:

 Heterosexual sex is the main mode of HIV transmission.

 Gendered power relations and social norms (e.g. women's subordinate status and relative lack of power to negotiate
     safer sex) exacerbate women's greater biological susceptibility to infection. Some women and girls are extremely
     vulnerable to physical and sexual violence and rape, which can cause HIV transmission.

 Lack of funding, fears about HIV status and negative attitudes among service providers specializing in AIDS pose
     obstacles to women living with HIV accessing services and information about family planning and infant care.

 Other target groups vulnerable to HIV infection and transmission include female entertainment workers selling sex,
     injecting drug users, women in prison, gay people and youth23. Lack of comprehensive knowledge about HIV, sexual
     conduct and hazardous use of alcohol and drugs, along with gender-based violence, increase the risk of HIV
     transmission among these target groups.

 The national clinical and policy guidelines responding to intimate partner violence and sexual violence are being
     developed, however currently there is no provision of free post-exposure prophylaxis in cases of sexual assault,
     relevant especially to women in most at-risk populations. There is also a lack of legal aid and legal assistance services
     for people living with HIV and most at-risk populations.

Violence Against Women and Girls

According to the 2005 Cambodia Demographic and Health Survey (CDHS), 22 percent of women had experienced physical,
sexual or emotional abuse from their spouse. This is down from 25 percent in 200024.

Cambodia's commune database (CDB) records the number of families25 seeking help from local authorities for domestic
violence. Between 2006 and 2010 the number of families seeking help for domestic violence reduced from 1.63 percent to
0.88 percent26.

Overall, compared to 2005, the 2009 MoWA Follow-up Survey showed fewer people found violence acceptable and more
people recognized that violent acts were illegal27.

The 2010 CDHS reported that the percentage of women who agreed with one reason for wife beating was down from 55
percent in 2005 to 45.7 percent in 201028.

The policy framework to respond to violence against women and girls has improved in recent years. The 2nd National
Action Plan to Prevent Violence Against Women (NAPVAW II) (2014-2018) includes five strategic sectors: 1) primary
prevention; 2) multi-sector protection and legal services; 3) law and policy; 4) capacity building; and 5) monitoring and
evaluation.

In 2010, the RGC issued the Village Commune Safety Policy, containing measures against domestic violence and
trafficking of women and girls.

22 Ministry of Women's Affairs (2014) Cambodia Gender Assessment, Executive Summary. December 2014. Phnom Penh.
23 Liu, K. L. and Chhorvann, C. (2010) Bros Khmer: Behavioral Risks On-site Sero-survey among At-risk Urban Men in Cambodia. Phnom Penh; FHI 360 & Na-

      tional Centre for HIV/AIDS, Dermatology and STIs and National AIDS Authority (2012a) Cambodia Country Progress Report 2012: Monitoring the Progress
      towards the Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV and AIDS. Phnom Penh.
24 National Institute of Statistics, Ministry of Planning, Directorate General for Health, Ministry of Health (2005) Cambodia Demographic and Health Survey.
      Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
25 The reports to the CDB are of families not individuals and therefore not disaggregated by type of violence, perpetrator or victim.
26 CDB Online (2013) http://db.ncdd.gov.kh/cdbonline/home/index.castle (accessed November, December 2013).
27 Ministry of Women's Affairs (2009) Violence Against Women, Follow Up Survey. Phnom Penh.
28 National Institute of Statistics, Ministry of Planning, Directorate General for Health, Ministry of Health (2010) Cambodia Demographic and Health Survey.
      Phnom Penh, Cambodia.

10 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
There is awareness that some women and girls are at increased risk of violence or have particular challenges in
accessing protection and social services. In recent years various research studies have broadened the understanding of
violence against women and girls in Cambodia.

There is a greater focus on developing coordinated multi-sectoral social services and legal support across the country for
women and children victims of violence. However, according to the Cambodia Gender Assessment 2014, there are still a
number of challenges for the RGC to tackle in the years ahead. They include:

 While some data indicates spousal violence is reducing, prevalence remains high. New data is required to fully
     understand the current situation.

 There is little robust data on rape and sexual violence reported by victims, however reporting of rape and sexual
     violence in the family and other settings is high. Gang rape is higher in Cambodia than other countries in the region.

 Sexual harassment is prevalent in the workplace and in communities. Women in some occupations are particularly
     vulnerable.

 Although the policy framework has improved significantly, there is a lack of coordination between authorities,
     investigative resources and skills, and clear guidelines to carry out and enforce the laws. Some laws and policies also
     have gaps.

 Social and legal support services to survivors of violence are not systematically provided, available and accessible for
     all women and girls.

 Women with disabilities are more likely to suffer from family non-partner violence, when compared to women without
     disabilities29. Additionally, stigma, harassment and discrimination is commonly experienced by lesbian, bi-sexual and
     transgender people in Cambodia, yet their experiences of abuse or discrimination are often overlooked or ignored by
     the response systems, their families and communities30. One in five garment factory workers experiences sexual
     harassment in or around the workplace31, and 80 percent of beer promoters experience unwanted sexual touching.
     Data is lacking on other groups of women at increased risk32.

 An undetermined number of women suffered sexual violence33 and/or forced marriage34 during the Khmer Rouge
     regime35.

Women in Public Decision-making and Politics

The RGC has taken several concrete steps to increase gender equality and advance women in decision-making, including
in policies, laws and programs. Special measures have been implemented, resulting in positive increases in the proportion
of women at national and sub-national levels. Obstacles to women's inclusion in public decision-making are well
documented, and solutions have been proposed and agreed by stakeholders.

In 2012, women held 14.75 percent, or nine out of a total of 61 seats in the Senate36. In the National Assembly, female
representation has more than tripled in two decades37. The number of women in Deputy Prime Minister, Minister, Secretary
of State and Under Secretary of State positions increased in 201338. The proportion of women in the judiciary has increased
since 200839. Women comprise 20 percent of Deputy Governors at provincial/capital level, which is above the 2015 CMDG 3

29 Astbury, Jill and Fareen Walji (2013) Triple Jeopardy: Gender-based violence and human rights violations experienced by women with disabilities in Cam-
      bodia. Phnom Penh: AusAID.

30 Cambodia Center for Human Rights (2010) Coming out in the Kingdom: Lesbian, gay and bisexual and transgender people in Cambodia. Phnom Penh:
      CCHR.

31 ILO (2012) Action-oriented research on gender equality and the working and living conditions of garment factory workers in Cambodia. ILO Regional Office
      for Asia and the Pacific.

32 CARE Cambodia (2005) A Report on the Situation of Beer Promotion Women in the Workplace. Phnom Penh.

33 De Langis, Theresa (2012) "Moral Offenses" and Sexual Violations against Women Under the Khmer Rouge Regime, Code 6. Phnom Penh, Cambodia.

34 Cambodian Defenders Project (2011) The Mystery of Sexual Violence under the Khmer Rouge Regime. Phnom Penh, Cambodia.

35 De Langis, Theresa (2012) Briefing Paper on the ECCC, the Cambodian Women's Hearing, and Steps for Addressing Sexual Violence under the Khmer Rouge
      Regime.

36 List of Senators in the 3rd mandate, Senate of The Kingdom of Cambodia http://www.senate.gov.kh/home/index.php?option=com_content&view=articl
      e&id=1718&Itemid=12&lang=km

37 List of Members of National Assembly for 5th Mandate, No. 420.NA, The National Assembly of The Kingdom of Cambodia.

38 Royal Decree No. NS/RKT/0913/903 dated 24 September 2013 on the Nomination of the Royal Government of Cambodia.

39 Ministry of Civil Service, Statistics Table of Civil Servants in Line Ministries, 31 January 2014.

NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018  11
target. The proportion of women councillors in capital and provincial councils increased from 10 percent in 2009 to 13.23
percent in 2014. In district and khan councils, female seats have increased from 12.68 percent in 2009 to 13.85 percent in
2014. The percentage of female commune councillors increased from 15.10 percent in 2007 to 17.78 percent in 201240.

The proportion of women in the civil service increased from 32 percent in 2007 to 37 percent in 201341. Of 27 ministries, 20
reported an increase in the percentage of female personnel, with increases in female representation ranging from 0.27
percent (2008) to 7.9 percent (2013)42. Women's enrolment in the Royal School of Administration (RSA) is increasing,
particularly in pre-service training43.

Despite progress, the following key challenges remain:

 Women in Cambodia remain under-represented in decision-making positions in politics, the public sector, and the
     judiciary.

 Discrimination impacts the ability of women to be promoted.

 Women are concentrated in sectors traditionally associated with women and at lower levels of government.

 At sub-national level, women face a number of challenges to participation in the public and political spheres,
     particularly workplace discrimination.

 The absence of temporary measures to `fast track' the participation of women in public decision-making, such as
     quotas, slows progress.

 The electoral system impacts on opportunities for women in decision-making in several ways: in candidate selection,
     the placement of women on party lists and the absence of quotas for women.

 The responsibility for achieving gender parity in decision-making is largely perceived to remain with women, however
     it is also the responsibility of men.

 Within the civil service, women are concentrated in lower-level positions. Women in management are more likely to
     hold deputy positions.

 There has been no cooperation among stakeholders in the creation of a framework or a joint program for promoting
     women's participation in decision-making.

Gender Mainstreaming in National and Sectoral Policies

A number of laws protecting women's rights have been enacted by the RCG, including: the Criminal Code (2009), the Law
on Administrative Management of the Capital, Provinces, Municipalities, Districts and Khans (2008), and the Law on
Elections of Capital Council, Provincial Council, Municipal Council, District Council and Khan Council (2008).

The NSDP (2014-2018) includes indicators relating to gender equality and puts stronger emphasis on line ministries' roles
in mainstreaming gender in their sectors.

Gender is mainstreamed in national reforms, such as Public Administration Reform (PAR), the Public Financial Management
Reform Program (PFMRP) and the Decentralization and De-concentration Reform Program (D&D), as well as the 10-year
National Program for Sub-National Democratic Development (NP-SNDD) and the 3-year Implementation Plan (IP3).

Notable progress has also been achieved in strengthening the institutional mechanisms to support gender mainstreaming,
including the Technical Working Group on Gender (TWG-G) as part of the Government-Donor Coordination Committee
(GDCC) and Gender Mainstreaming Action Groups (GMAGs) in line ministries. Most line ministries have also developed and
implemented Gender Mainstreaming Action Plans (GMAPs). At the sub-national level, Women and Children Consultative
Committees (WCCC) have been established at capital, provincial, municipality, district and khan levels. They provide
suggestions and recommendations to the council, board of governors, governors and other council committees on issues
related to gender equity and women's and children's issues within the authority, function and duties of the council.

40 Official Results of the Commune/Sangkat Election for the 3rd Mandate, National Election Committee, 24 June 2012, Phnom Penh. Cambodia.
41 Ministry of Civil Service, Statistics Table of Civil Servants in Line Ministries, 31 January 2014.
42 Ibid.
43 Lists of Trainees by Year, Royal School of Administration, 2014, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.

12 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
Although there is good progress in mainstreaming gender in policies, programs and mechanisms to support gender
mainstreaming at national and sub-national levels, some challenges still remain:
 There is limited capacity in line ministries and institutions for in-depth gender analysis, advocacy and gender

     mainstreaming.
 There are gaps in the implementation of laws, policies, plans and programs.
 Gender mainstreaming has not yet been integrated into PBA format.
 There is limited coordination between relevant stakeholders.
 Links between technical departments of MoWA and GMAGs of line ministries and other technical working groups

     (TWGs) remain weak.
 There is limited budget for implementing gender-related plans and activities.
 Sectoral policies, as well as policies and programs for gender equality, have not yet fully addressed the needs of

     vulnerable groups of women and girls44.

44 Namely women and girls with disabilities; elderly women; women and girls with HIV; widows and women-headed households; women and girls from in-
      digenous groups and from ethnic and religious minorities; lesbian and bisexual women; transgender people; women survivors of gender-based violence
      and their children; women who experienced sexual violence and/or forced marriage during the Khmer Rouge regime; women and girls living in remote
      areas; women in prison; and women engaged in prostitution and/or working in the men's entertainment sector.

                                                                                                   NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018 13
PART I

VISION AND MISSION

VISION

Cambodian women and men have equal rights, with women and girls enjoying personal and physical safety, participating
fully in the whole spectrum of public life and decision-making equally to men and boys, and are economically empowered
to guarantee their self-reliance and the well-being of children and families.
For this to be realized, MoWA's capacity needs to be realigned to meet the changing needs of women and men in society,
and to focus more on upstream programs and policies. MoWA's role will transition to that of policymaker, leading
government partners at both national and sub-national levels in gender mainstreming, by coordinating, planning,
mobilizing resources and implementing transformative initiatives.

MISSION

Close gender gaps and promote gender equality and women's empowerment in all key areas by:
1. Mainstreaming gender in the process of national (Rectangular Strategy, NSDP) and sectoral (line ministry) policy and

     program development, implementation, monitoring and evaluation.
2. Mainstreaming gender in key government reform programs such as SNDD, Public Financial Management (PFM), PAR

     and Judicial Reform, including cross-cutting areas such as climate change and vulnerable groups of women and girls.
3. CoordinatingandmonitoringimplementationofspecificnationalprogramssuchasWomen'sEconomicEmpowerment,

     NAPVAW and women in public decision-making.
4. Scaling up the on-going sectoral gender mainstreaming work and supporting gender-responsive social accountability

     and social protection in services such as education and health, as well as in legal and civic rights.
5. Focusing on broad-based organizational and capacity development for promoting gender equality across government

     agencies and programs.
6. Targeting under-served areas and groups that experience the largest gender-based gaps and disadvantages.

14 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
PART II

OBJECTIVES

Neary Rattanak IV has the following main objectives:
1. Promote favourable conditions for increasing women's access to skills training, employment, productive resources,

     social protection, voice and decision-making in the economic sector.
2. Increase women's and girls' access to education and vocational training by promoting participation, awareness and

     favourable conditions.
3. Promote the provision of and access to quality and affordable health services responding to women's specific health

     needs.
4. Ensure safety for women and girls in the family and society through awareness raising and by implementing relevant

     action plans, laws and regulations to prevent gender based violence.
5. Promote the participation of women in decision-making at all levels through increasing the number of female civil

     servants and elected leaders, as well as strengthen their capacity and opportunities for promotion.
6. Improve aid effectiveness and development sustainability through institutional capacity development, ownership

     and partnership.

                                                                                                   NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018 15
PART III

STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK

The Neary Rattanak IV Strategic Plan includes a core program for institutional strengthening and capacity development
towards gender equality, through gender mainstreaming and women's empowerment in the context of economic growth,
social protection and services, and cross-cutting issues. Thematic areas in Neary Rattanak IV are:

1. Economic Growth
      1.1. Women's Economic Empowerment

2. Access to Social Services and Protection
      2.1. Education of Women and Girls, and Behavioural Change
      2.2. Health, HIV and Nutrition of Women and Girls
      2.3. Legal Protection for Women and Girls

3. Cross-Cutting Issues
      3.1. Women in Public Decision-Making and Politics; Gender Responsive Government Policies and Reform Programs
      3.2. Gender and Climate Change, Green Growth and Disaster Risk Management

4. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Development toward Gender Equality

1. Economic Growth

1.1. Women's Economic Empowerment

Strategic Analysis

Women's economic empowerment is widely recognized as one the critical foundations for promoting gender equality and
women's empowerment. Women have historically played a critical role in Cambodia's economic development, however
they remain economically disadvantaged, particularly with respect to access and control over economic resources,
opportunities for increasing their skills, decision-making and higher-level employment opportunities. The RGC has
recently approved the Millennium Development Goal Acceleration Framework (MAF), which focuses exclusively on Women's
Economic Empowerment. MoWA subsequently produced an Operational Strategy for Women's Economic Empowerment
(OS-WEE), which provides a roadmap for longer term WEE program implementation.

In the Fifth Legislature of the National Assembly, the RGC will continue to implement economic diversification policies
based on the competitiveness of the Cambodian economy, and link the economy to regional production value chains. It
will pay special attention to increasing rice production and milled rice for export, raising manufacturing and agro-industry
products for export, and furthering the Tourism Development Plan 2011-2020. It will promote entrepreneurship (including
small and medium enterprises) especially among Cambodian nationals, covering how to run a business, investment
options, incentives, consultancies, capital and management and production techniques.

Neary Rattanak IV will focus on women's economic empowerment by developing and implementing a PBA under the
leadership of MoWA, in partnership with development partners and line ministries to support the Women's Economic
Empowerment program through the TWG on Women's Economic Empowerment (TWGG-WEE). The program will involve
various line ministries (including the Ministry of Ministry of Industry, Mines and Energy (MIME), the Ministry of Labour and
Vocational Training (MoLVT), the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF), the Ministry of Tourism (MoT), the
Ministry of Commerce (MoC) and others). The private sector, chambers of commerce and civil society organizations will
also be involved. The PBA will be based on mutually agreed principles, actions and targets among these stakeholders, and
the successful outcome will rely on all actors' cooperation and efforts.

MoWA will transition from project implementation and service delivery to catalyst and provider of capacity development
and technical advice on gender mainstreaming in the economic sector. The focus will be on ensuring that relevant line
ministries and economic actors are systematically addressing specific targeted gender gaps in their economic, business
and financial services, and MoWA is able to build line ministries' capacity for gender equality, and support and monitor
their programs. Particular focus will be on MIME, MoLVT, MAFF, MoC, MoT, MIH, and others.

16 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
Strategic Objective

Improve women's status in the economy, particularly in formal employment, with increased incomes, livelihoods and
social protection, and equal economic and social rights and opportunities.

Strategies

1. Align Neary Rattanak IV strategy for Women's Economic Empowerment and the Operational Strategy for Women's
      Economic Empowerment (OS-WEE) with the MDG Acceleration Framework (MAF).

2. Mainstream gender in the assessments for human resource development related to ASEAN integration and ensure
      inclusion of vulnerable groups.

3. Innovate models for cooperating with the private sector, particularly in developing `green' social enterprises.
4. Promote the establishment and implementation of the National Employment Policy (NEP) and programs that include

      opportunities for women.
5. Expand women's benefit through improved working conditions, social protection and labour standards.
6. Facilitate women's equal access to the arbitration council for resolving labour disputes.
7. Facilitate women's equal access to vocational training at public, private or NGO facilities.
8. Increase understanding of how to create and strengthen women's formal enterprises.
9. Facilitate women's equal access to business services relevant for MSMEs.
10. Enhance networking capacity of women entrepreneurs.
11. Equip women with skills and competencies to manage their households in a socially and environmentally sustainable

      manner.
12. Ensure women's access to secure financial services.
13. Improve women's economic opportunities so that they have the choice to work, earn income and invest in livelihoods.
14. Promote and address women migrant workers' challenges in the process of developing migration policies and other

      migration programs.
15. Ensure the reduction of migration-related risks for Cambodian women workers.

2. Access to Social Services and Protection

2.1. Education of Women and Girls, and Behavioural Change

Strategic Analysis

The strategy on education complements, and is a necessary pre-requisite for the success of, the above strategy on
economic empowerment. As Cambodia moves towards middle-income status and regional integration, there is an
increasing need to promote equal access to high quality education relevant to the forthcoming needs of the rapidly
changing labour market. The gender gap, particularly in secondary and higher education due to insufficient locally
available education facilities, combined with traditional values that place lower primacy on girls and women, needs to be
addressed.

During the Fifth Legislature, the RGC will further promote implementing the `Education for All' policy, improvement in the
quality and effectiveness of education services, and will further develop the capacity of educational institutions and staff45.
MoWA is expected to provide GMAGs with technical support to analyze remaining gender gaps, advocate for and initiate
change and monitor progress. For example, adult literacy and information, education and communication (IEC) materials
for educating girls and preventing drop-outs have been part of MoWA's work, but they have been integrated into the line

45 Royal Government of Cambodia, National Strategic Development Plan 2014-2018.

                                                                                 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018  17
ministries' portfolios successfully over the years. Programmatic interventions would ideally be handled by MoEYS, while
the role of MoWA can be moved to increasing social accountability and raising awareness among women and girls about
their entitlements to services and social protection, and monitoring their access to these services.

MoWA will continue to coordinate with members of the Committee for Upholding Social Morality and Women's and Khmer
Family Values, in the implementation of the committee's multi-sectoral strategic plan aimed at preserving good culture,
including a culture of non-violence, and positive social attitudes towards gender equality.

Strategic Objective

Promote gender equality in education; particularly increase access of women and girls in vulnerable groups to education
services through awareness raising, social accountability measures, scholarships and other financial assistance. Increase
the participation of women in all areas of education service delivery and management and promote gender-responsive
social attitudes.

Strategies

1. Improve technical capacity and commitment of relevant officials on gender mainstreaming in policies, programs and
      planning in the education sector.

2. Increase access to day care and community kindergarten facilities.

3. Coordinate the development and implementation of the National Action Plan for Upholding Social Morality and
      Women's and Khmer Family Values.

4. Promote positive images of empowered women and girls and gender-sensitive role models for men and boys.

5. Conduct research studies on the needs of vulnerable women, including the aging, poor, disabled, ethnic minorities
      and those living with HIV.

6. Promote Sub-national Administration's participation and accountability to provide comprehensive and equitable
      education services.

2.2Health, HIV and Nutrition of Women and Girls

Strategic Analysis

MoWA recognizes that gender inequalities are responsible for most women's health issues and that poor health and HIV/
AIDS delivery systems have a higher negative impact on women than men. There is therefore growing commitment among
stakeholders in the health sector that strategies to improve health delivery and Health Equity Funds should be gender
focused in order to increase their impact on women's lives and achieve gender equality.

During the Fifth Legislature, the RGC will continue implementing and updating the Health Sector Strategic Plan (2008-
2015) to promote sustainable development of the health sector, aimed at improved sanitation, health, nutrition and well-
being of the Cambodian people, particularly the poor and vulnerable (including women and children). MoWA will provide
the MoH GMAG with technical support to analyze remaining gender gaps, and advocate for and initiate changes, where
required. For example, IEC for reproductive health, HIV and malaria have been part of MoWA's work program in the past,
but they should be integrated into the MoH portfolio. Programmatic interventions would ideally be handled by MoH, with
the role of MoWA moving to increasing social accountability and raising awareness among women and girls about their
entitlements to services and social protection, and monitoring their access to these services.

MoWA will continue to work with the National AIDS Authority to promote gender equality in the implementation of the 4th
National Strategic Plan for Comprehensive and Multi-Sectoral Response to HIV/AIDS (2011-2015) and the development and
implementation of the 5th National Strategic Plan (2016-2020).

MoWA will continue to contribute to the development and implementation of the National Strategy on Food Security and
Nutrition (2014-2018).

18 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
Strategic Objective

Promote gender equality in the health sector by expanding women's access to information and high quality, affordable
health care, including reproductive, sexual and psychological health, food security and nutrition, and prevention of
communicable diseases such as malaria, HIV and STDs, and non-communicable diseases (eye care, cancer).

Strategies

1. Strengthen capacity and commitment of relevant officials on gender mainstreaming in policies, planning and budget-
     ing in the health sector.

2. Analyze and address gender disparities in the health sector.

3. Analyze and address gender gaps in lagging areas and address them in programs, plans and budgets at the sub-na-
     tional level.

4. Contribute to promoting public awareness raising on reproductive, sexual and psychological health, food security and
     nutrition. Protect and fight against communicable diseases such as malaria, HIV/AIDS and STDs, and non-communica-
     ble diseases such as eye diseases and cancer.

5. Strengthen gender mainstreaming and women's empowerment in health-related national strategic plans and pro-
     grams.

2.3. Legal Protection for Women and Girls

Strategic Analysis

While the legal framework and national strategies for protecting women against gender-based violence (GBV) and
trafficking are in place, significant action needs to be taken all at levels and across a range of different actors to
operationalize them to ensure women and girls are safe from various forms of GBV and trafficking.

Neary Rattanak IV will focus on legal protection for women and girls through the development and implementation of a
PBA under the leadership of MoWA. This will be done in partnership with development partners and line ministries to
support the development and implementation of NAPVAW II, through the TWG-G Sub-Group on GBV. Line ministries to be
involved include the Ministry of Interior (MoI), MoH, the Ministry of Justice (MoJ), MoEYS, the Ministry of Social Affairs,
Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation (MoSVY), MoLVT, the Ministry of Planning (MoP) and others, including development
partners and civil society organizations (CSOs). The PBA will be based on mutually agreed principles, actions and targets
among these stakeholders, and the successful outcome will rely on all actors' cooperation and efforts.

MoWA will play an important role in coordinating and overseeing the implementation of NAPVAW II and the related PBA,
which will involve a range of activities and actors. MoWA will participate in developing and implementing the next National
Plan of Action for the Suppression of Human Trafficking, Smuggling, Labour and Sexual Exploitation (NPA-STSLS), which is led
by MoI. Other gender and legal issues include civil registration, women's awareness of their legal rights and access to
justice.

MoWA's role is that of a facilitating leader, catalyst and coordinator to reverse the entrenched discrimination against
women and to ensure women can enjoy equal civic and legal protection.

Because gender is a cross-cutting issue, it is challenging for MoWA to determine the scope of programs and resources for
implementation, particularly for activities which are related to multiple ministries and institutions. MoWA's role is to
coordinate and monitor overall results of such programs, while implementing their own specific activities. Relevant
ministries and institutions need to ensure that gender-specific activities are incorporated into programs and annual plans,
and to mobilize resources for implementation of those activities.

In the 5th Mandate, the RGC will continue to implement key activities in accordance with the strategy for legal and judicial
reform. MoWA will continue to participate in the implementation process of activities under this reform strategy to
promote gender equality in laws, regulations and policies, as well as to increase the proportion of women in the judicial
structure and justice system.

                                                                                                   NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018 19
Strategic Objective

To reduce all forms of violence against women and girls through effective implementation of the NAPVAW II (2014-2018)
and National Action Plan to Fight Human Trafficking (2014-2018).

Strategies

1. Strengthen gender mainstreaming in laws, regulations and policies and address violence against women, migrants
      and marginalized women and girls.

2. Identify specific measures to address GBV and discrimination against marginalized women and girls in collaboration
      with relevant stakeholders.

3. Coordinate the implementation of NAPVAW II (2014-2018) through TWG-G-GBV under the PBA framework.

4. Develop and use systems for baseline data and monitoring of data related to all forms of GBV.

5. Promote public awareness on laws, regulations and services related to the prevention of GBV, and migration.

6. Increase the number and capacity of MoWA's Judicial Police Officers at both national and sub-national levels to assist
      GBV victims.

7. Strengthen and expand One-Stop Services for victims of GBV.

8. Contribute to the implementation of the National Plan of Action to Fight Human Trafficking, (2014-2018).

9. Contribute to the development and effective implementation of the 3rd and 4th Action Plans to Combat Trafficking in
      Persons in the Greater Mekong Sub-Region (2015-2018).

3. Cross-Cutting Issues

Neary Rattanak IV has recognized women in decision-making, gender mainstreaming, climate change, green growth,
disaster risk management and vulnerable groups as critical cross-cutting issues. The needs of vulnerable groups of women
and girls are integrated and addressed in all key strategic areas and interventions of Neary Rattanak IV.

3.1. Women Public Decision-making and Politics, and Gender Responsive Government
     Policies and Reform Programs

Strategic Analysis

The RGC has recognized that sustainable development and good governance depend on women taking part in all decision-
making processes. The most significant quantitative and qualitative gender gaps are in the areas of political participation
and decision-making, due to deeply entrenched gender biases against women which systematically prevent women from
getting equal access to these opportunities.

In the 5th Mandate, the RGC will focus on promoting women in the public sector through increasing the gender balance in
line ministry management and strengthening women's ability to pursue leadership both at management and technical
levels46.

These priorities could be addressed through active and strategic participation in the processes of SNDD, PAR, the National
Election Committee (NEC), political parties and line ministries.

Strong political backing and high-level advocacy from CNCW would be instrumental in pushing this agenda forward.
Through PAR there is potential to advocate for affirmative action for women in the civil service to be implemented and
monitored. MoWA works with the Ministry of Civil Service (MoCS) to maintain up-to-date statistics on women at all levels
of the civil service, and monitor changes.

CNCW and MoWA can advocate with key stakeholders, including the political parties, for legislating affirmative action and

46 Royal Government of Cambodia (2013) Rectangular Strategy for Growth, Employment, Equity and Efficiency, Phase III.

20 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
gender equality commitments in political party laws and policies, especially increasing the number of women candidates
on party lists.

MoWA can supplement the policy demand side with additional supporting measures to increase the quality and quantity
of the supply side, such as technical, leadership and management capacity development for women candidates and civil
servants, women in leadership forums and support networks, and promoting women's access to higher education. MoWA
and the Ministry of Civil Service need to ensure that women participate equally in regular civil service capacity development
programs and opportunities.

MoWA will continue to work with LMs, in particular GMAPs to ensure that gender is mainstreamed throughout on-going
RGC policy and reform programs, and to increase the national budget allocation for gender mainstreaming by targeting
specific and adequate resources at the national machinery, as well as in line ministries, with solid gender-mainstreaming
strategies. MoWA is planning to develop the first National Policy on Gender Equality. This, in conjunction with successful
integration of gender equality measures at the reform level, will create an enabling environment and pave the way for
successful mainstreaming at the sectoral level.

MoWA coordinates with PAR/MoCS and line ministries to ensure all programs, legislation and guidelines related to PAR are
gender responsive. Capacity is needed on gender mainstreaming into public administration and public services of MoWA,
MoCS, RSA and line ministries.

The NP-SNDD is an important vehicle for increasing women's participation in decision-making at sub-national level, as
there is a strong gender-mainstreaming component to it. Through the NP-SNDD there is potential for quantitative and
qualitative increases in women's leadership and decision-making at local levels. This can be done through technical
support, capacity building and promoting networking among women leaders at sub-national levels across regions.

The RGC will continue to implement the PFMRP aimed at improving the efficiency and effectiveness of Cambodia's public
financial management system according to international standards. MoWA and the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF)
will promote gender-responsive budgeting by encouraging all government agencies to consider the resource implications
of mainstreaming gender into their on-going programs, and ensure that this total allocation is requested from MEF.

In stage two of the PFMRP, MoWA and GMAGs will monitor to ensure that gender equality measures are included in all line
ministries' annual plans and budgets.

Strategic Objective

Promote gender equality in decision-making at all levels and mainstream gender in policies, plans, sectoral programs and
key reform programs of RGC.

Strategies

1. Increase the proportion of women participating in the civil service.

2. Strengthen the capacity and ability of women civil servants and women in decision-making to fulfil their roles and
      responsibilities.

3. Increase the proportion of women in political positions.

4. Update and disseminate the Cambodia Gender Assessment and ensure that national statistical systems are gender-
      responsive.

5. Strengthen gender-responsive national and sectoral strategies.

6. Cooperate in mainstreaming gender into Implementation Plan of NP-NSDD.

7. Ensure that policies, plans, programs, legal regulations and processes related to PAR are gender-responsive.

8. Cooperate with line ministries to ensure they receive national budget for gender mainstreaming through the PFMRP.

9. Promote women's access to and control over land rights through gender mainstreaming in the land reform program.

                                                                                                   NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018 21
3.2 Gender and Climate Change, Green Growth and Disaster Management
Strategic Analysis

Programmes related to climate change reflect the new development agenda for the Royal Government of Cambodia, as
well as gender mainstreaming in climate change programmes. The National Climate Change Committee, which includes
MoWA as member, will seek a deeper understanding of how to address the gender impact of climate change.
The Ministry of Environment, the National Climate Change Committee, and the National Council for Green Growth have
developed the Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan (CCCSP) 2014-2028, the National Policy on Green Growth and
National Strategic Plan on Green Growth 2013-2030. In the process of implementing these policy frameworks, more
attention should be paid to gender mainstreaming. MoWA in collaboration with the Secretariat of the Committee for
Climate Change is promoting gender equality and women's empowerment in all relevant aspects including the National
Council for Green Growth.
MoWA has developed Strategic Plan on Gender and Climate Change to contribute to the development and implementation
of gender responsive policies related to climate change. This is not a stand-alone strategy but is cross-cutting and has been
integrated into the implementation processes of the Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan as well as sectoral climate
change strategic plans of relevant Ministries.
MoWA will continue to participate actively in the National Committee for Disaster Management in the implementation of
National Action Plan and Strategy for Disaster Risk Reduction 2014-2018.

Strategic Objective

Promote gender equality in processes and policy implementation related to climate change, green growth and disaster
risk management within line ministries and institutions at national and sub-national levels, to reduce the impacts on
women and vulnerable women, and to contribute to and benefit from green growth.

Strategies

1. Strengthen the capacity and support of senior officials and technical staff in gender mainstreaming in the climate
      change, green growth and disaster risk management program.

2. Mainstream gender considerations in the development processes and implementation of policy, programs and
      strategies on climate change, green growth and disaster risk management.

3. Ensure equal participation of women, and particularly vulnerable women, in coordination processes and advocacy
      on climate change at international, national and sub-national levels for women's interests.

4. Reduce the impacts of climate change and disasters on women.
5. Increase women's participation in green growth activities.
6. Create new innovative schemes and activities to address gender issues in climate change, green growth and disaster

      risk management which are tested and proposed to line ministries for integration into regular on-going programs.

22 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
4. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Development
    towards Gender Equality

Strategic Analysis

Program-based approaches are the Government's preferred tool for implementing sector strategies and core reforms.
PBAs are regarded as the optimal mechanism to promote national ownership of development programs, and thus are the
official mechanism of aid effectiveness in Cambodia, to ensure coherent programing of resources, strengthen national
capacities and systems, and most importantly, deliver development results more efficiently and effectively. At the third
meeting of the Council for the Development of Cambodia (CDC) in June 2010, the RGC and its development partners
endorsed and agreed to move forward with the PBA model in order to maximize the combined impact of domestic
resources and external development assistance. A key component of a PBA is a comprehensive policy framework with
government leadership and coordination of all partners mobilized around the policy framework as a minimum condition.
Examples of such policy frameworks include the NP-SNDD, PFMRP, the Education Strategic Plan and the second Health
Sector Support Program (HSSP II).

Gender was identified as one of the key thematic areas to be used for PBA in Cambodia, as well as one of the three cross-
cutting pillars for national development. In 2012, MoWA established the PBA Committee and Secretariat (PBA C/S). MoWA
currently has two `sub-PBAs' underway covering Women's Economic Empowerment and Gender Based Violence (NAPVAW).
A PBA for gender equality requires MoWA to take the technical and political lead on facilitating and coordinating analysis
and advocacy and ensuring that gender is mainstreamed across government processes. This will see a progressive
reduction in MoWA's involvement in implementation of smaller service-delivery and awareness-creation projects at the
community level, other than as innovative experimental pilot activities (such as action research on emerging issues) to be
scaled up by the appropriate line ministries. It will progressively re-orient its efforts towards broader dimensions of gender
mainstreaming - research, policy development, monitoring and evaluation, coordination and capacity building. This in
turn requires strengthening MoWA's current capacity for gender mainstreaming and coordination and for taking a lead role
in advocacy across government. A stronger MoWA would provide stakeholders with an authoritative source on gender
mainstreaming and gender issues in Cambodia and would reduce the need for line ministries and development partners
to support diverse small initiatives through other ministries and agencies.

The UN CEDAW Committee recommended that an assessment be done to examine the national machinery for the
advancement of women and related institutions, such as the TWG-G and GMAGs, and links to other key entities (e.g. other
TWGs, MEF, MoP, CDC), and to provide recommendations for improvement.

A MoWA capacity assessment was carried out in 2010, however it only covered staff in MoWA at the central level. The big-
gest challenge in the coming years will be advocating for gender-responsive action across government (other key im-
plementing line ministries and secretariats of inter-ministerial councils) as well as at the sub-national level, as functions
and financial resources are devolved to the sub-national level. Increased attention to assessing the capacity development
needs of the Provincial Department of Women's Affairs (PDWA), District Office of Women's Affairs (DOWA) and commune
level staff is also very important.

A capacity development strategy has been developed, with particular emphasis on strengthening MoWA's capacity to
mainstream gender in key sectors, including strengthening the capacity of technical departments to support and monitor
gender mainstreaming efforts; developing capacity for transitioning from a project-based to a program-based
approach to gender equality; and strengthening PDWA and DOWA capacity to effectively engage in and support gender-
responsive sub-national planning, budgeting, monitoring and social accountability processes.

This core program will be progressive and on-going and will provide tailor-made capacity development services to
the necessary stakeholders, both within and outside of MoWA, according to their functions and roles in the government-
wide gender mainstreaming process.

Strategic Objective

To strengthen the institutional structure and capacity to promote gender equality through PBA and good governance,
which includes vulnerable groups of women and girls47.

47 Women and girls with disabilities; elderly women; women and girls with HIV; widows and women-headed households; women and girls from indig-
      enous groups and from ethnic and religious minorities; lesbian and bisexual women; women survivors of gender-based violence; women in prison; and

                                                                                                   NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018 23
Strategies

1. Assess institutional and national machinery functions for promoting gender equality.
2. Revise structures, roles and responsibilities of national machinery for promoting gender equality.
3. Assess the capacity of each entity following the restructuring process (in accordance with the revised structure and

      network).
4. Develop capacity development materials for training under the capacity development program.
5. Develop the capacity of MoWA to be able to conduct capacity assessments and capacity development for line

      ministries to promote gender equality across sectors.
6. Strengthen MoWA capacity for planning, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), sector-specific gender analysis and

      gender mainstreaming in policies, planning and programs.
7. Strengthen GMAGs' capacity to integrate gender equality into their line ministry policies, plans and budgets. Ensure

      that the capacity of the national machinery is increased and harmonized, and sector-specific in approach.
8. Develop capacity of gender working groups in line departments on integrating gender in sectoral policies, plans and

      budgets at the sub-national level.
9. Strengthen mechanisms for promoting gender equality, aligning with CNCW for the implementation of national laws,

      policies and CEDAW.
10. Implement a PBA towards gender equality.
11. Mainstream gender across relevant sectoral TWGs.
12. Enhance system for information dissemination, communication and reporting of MoWA and stakeholders under

      Neary Rattanak IV and PBA on Gender Equality at national and sub-national levels.
13. Develop the PBA mechanism according to the guidelines of the public administration and public financial

      management programs.
14. Strengthen the system for internal M&E of progress and operation of the mechanism to promote gender equality at

      sub-national and national levels.

      women engaged in prostitution.

24 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
PART IV

ACTION PLAN

Strategies                      Indicators                        Key Activities                  Relevant Responsible      Time Frame     Resources
                                                                                                  Ministries/Agencies
                                                                                                                            14 15 16 17 18 National DP Funding
                                                                                                                                                                 Budget

1. ECONOMIC GROWTH

Women's Economic Empowerment

Overall Objective: Improve women's equal status in the economy through enterprise development, employment promotion and social protection, leading to increased incomes and better
livelihoods.

1. Align Neary Rattanak IV,     Neary Rattanak IV, OS-WEE are Align the development of the MoWA, line ministries and other x x          xx

WEE and OS-WEE with the published and disseminated. OS-WEE to the recommendations stakeholders

MDG Acceleration                                                  of the Cambodia Gender

Framework (MAF).                                                  Assessment 2014.

                                M&E system for WEE program is     Monitor and evaluate the        TWGG sub-group on WEE     xxxxx       x             x
                                in place.                         implementation of Neary
                                                                  Rattanak IV, WEE and OS-WEE.

                                Mechanisms of the Gender          Build the capacity of MoWA and  MoWA and line ministries  xxxxx       x             x
                                Mainstreaming Action Groups of    line ministry staff on gender
                                line ministries are functioning.  analysis and gender
                                                                  mainstreaming in policies and
                                                                  programs on economic
                                                                  development.

                                Implementation of MAF48 is        Coordinate the implementation   TWGG on WEE               xx          xx
                                monitored and aligned with        and monitoring of MAF through
                                OS-WEE.                           the Working Group on WEE.

48 MoWA launched the MDG Acceleration Framework Cambodia Action Plan 2013-2015. It focuses on women's economic empowerment and contributes to the achievement of other CMDGs in poverty reduction, health and education. The Action
      Plan prioritizes three areas of intervention: (i) Providing training for jobs for women that are consistent with market demand; (ii) Enhancing micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) led by women to ensure that women have the capacity
      to lead and grow their enterprises and move from the formal to the informal sector; and (iii) Improving livelihoods in rural communities, especially for poor women.

25 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
2. Mainstream gender in the Research results about the    Contribute to studies and           MoWA, line ministries and      xxxx        x  x
                                                                                                                                            x
assessments for human           impact of ASEAN integration are research by integrating gender international organizations                  x
                                                                                                                                            x
resource development            presented and disseminated. aspects in MSME development,                                                    x

related to ASEAN integration                              higher education, vocational

and ensure inclusion                                      training, wage employment and

vulnerable groups.                                        labour migration.

                                                          Promote the dissemination of        MoWA, line ministries and      xxxx        x
                                                          results, best practices and policy  international organizations
                                                          recommendations related to
                                                          human resource development.

                                                          Integrate research findings in the TWGG-WEE                               xxx
                                                          agenda of TWGG-WEE meetings.                                       xx

3. Innovative models for        Number of cooperation     Assess and select suitable legal MoWA, private sector and NGOs                 x

cooperating with the private agreements or MoUs between options for establishing public-

sector, particularly in         MoWA, NGOs and social or  private partnerships, public

developing `green' social `green' enterprises providing companies or other contractual

enterprises.                    social benefits through income models at WDCs.

                                and employment opportunities Zone and select WDCs by region MoWA, LMs, private sector and    xxx         x
                                for women and their families. and economic clusters with
                                                                                              NGOs

                                                          income earning opportunities for

                                                          women, including public and

                                                          private stakeholders and NGOs.

                                                          Develop ToR and contract            MoWA, private sector and NGOs  xxx         x

                                                          templates to start the

                                                          implementation of public-private

                                                          partnerships based on legal

                                                          options decided by MoWA.

26 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
Employment opportunities for women, including disabled and other vulnerable groups, are increased and working conditions are improved

4. Promote the establishment Programs on employment              Coordinate and collaborate with   MoWA, MoLVT and development         xxxx  x  x
      and implementation of the opportunities for women.         MoLVT to incorporate and          partners                                  x  x
      National Employment                                        monitor gender-equitable
      Policy (NEP) and programs                                  employment targets.                                                         x  x
      that include opportunities                                                                                                             x  x
      for women.                                                                                                                             x  x

5. Expand women's benefit Specific articles and references Contribute to formulation of            MoWA, MoLVT and development         xxxx
                                                                                                   partners
through improved working in the Cambodian Labour Law policies and programs for

conditions, social protection are aligned to the requirements improving working conditions,

and labour standards.           of women and gender equality. social protection and labour

                                                                 standards in the private sector

                                                                 by including gender-equality

                                                                 considerations.

                                                                 Coordinate with MoLVT             MoWA, MoLVT and development         xxxx
                                                                 initiatives to enhance social     partners
                                                                 security (social insurance) for
                                                                 formal sector workers.

                                Gender-responsive M&E system     Contribute to M&E of policies MoWA, MoLVT and development             xxxx
                                for the implementation of
                                working conditions, social       and programs for improving        partners
                                protection and labour standards
                                is in place.                     working conditions, social

                                                                 protection and labour standards.

6. Facilitate women's equal Gender-sensitive records at the      Collaborate with MoLVT, ILO and MoWA, MoLVT, ILO, development         xxxx
      access to the arbitration arbitration council.
      council for resolving labour                               employers' associations           partners and CAMFEBA
      disputes.
                                                                 (CAMFEBA) on policies and

                                                                 programs to increase the share

                                                                 of women seeking labour conflict

                                                                 resolution.

27 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
7. Facilitate women's equal Gender-sensitive records at             Integrate gender in the planning MoWA and MoLVT                  xxx          x  x
      access to vocational training officially licensed public and  and implementation process of
      at public, private or NGO private institutions or NGOs.       TVET programs.                                                                x  x
      facilities.                                                                                                                                 x  x
                                                                                                                                                  x  x
                                                                    Align the supply of vocational    MoWA and MoLVT                        xxxx
                                                                    training to the demand of                                                     x  x
                                                                    employers in the public, private                                        xx    x  x
                                                                    and NGO sector.                                                         xxxx  x  x

                                Number of WDC trainees              Review and update existing        MoWA/WDC                              xxxx
                                applying the skills gained from     curricula at WDCs.                                               xxxxx
                                vocational training.
                                                                    Introduce innovative technical    MoWA/WDC, DPs and NGOs                xxxx
                                                                    learning modules and
                                                                    methodologies, including those
                                                                    for entrepreneurship
                                                                    development.

                                                                    Conduct trainings for WDC staff   MoWA
                                                                    in business, entrepreneurship
                                                                    development and job matching.

                                                                    Introduce and strengthen M&E MoWA
                                                                    for performance measurement.

                                Vocational training centres         Review, take stock and suggest    MoWA, LMs, private sector and
                                                                                                      NGOs
                                include women-friendly facilities. the construction of women-

                                                                    friendly facilities at new and

                                                                    existing training centres.

28 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
Women-owned micro, small and medium enterprises are created or improved

8. Increase understanding of Women entrepreneurs have a In cooperation with MIH, MoC                 MoWA, MIH, MoC, MEF and       xxxxx  x  x
                                                                                                     women business associations          x  x
how to create and improve better understanding of laws and and MEF, conduct awareness                (WBAs)                               x  x
                                                                                                                                          x  x
formal enterprises for          regulations related to MSMEs. programs on MSME related
                                                                                                                                          x  x
women .                                                           topics (business registration,

                                                                  customs, tax, etc.)

                                Issues related to women-owned     Compile, analyze and present       MoWA and WBAs                 xxxx
                                businesses are integrated in the  critical challenges experienced
                                agenda of the Government-         by women entrepreneurs in the
                                Private Sector Forum (G-PSF).     agenda of G-PSF.

                                                                  Encourage women to participate     MoWA, WBAs and G-PSF working  xxxx
                                                                  in the G-PSF working groups and    groups
                                                                  provide them with technical
                                                                  support.

9. Facilitate women's equal Number of women benefiting In partnership with public and MoWA, LMs and MFIs                           xxxx
                                                                                                                                   xxxx
access to business services from obtaining business services. private providers of business

relevant for MSMEs .                                              services, including MFIs, conduct

                                                                  events, workshops, trainings to

                                                                  create awareness on business

                                                                  services for women

                                                                  entrepreneurs.

10. Enhance networking          Number and membership of          Together with MAFF, MoC, MoT       MoWA, LMs and private sector
      capabilities of women     WBAs.                             and MIH, promote the formation
      entrepreneurs.                                              and operation of WBAs and
                                                                  producer groups.

                                Female membership of business Encourage women and negotiate MoWA, LMs and private sector

                                associations.                     with business associations to

                                                                  increase female membership.

29 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
Poor women and vulnerable groups are investing in the development of livelihoods

11. Equip women with skills Number of women applying life          In cooperation with public and     MoWA, LMs, private sector, NGOs  xxxx         x  x
                                                                   private service providers,                                                       x  x
and competencies to               skills obtained from public and  conduct various life-skill                                                       x  x
                                                                   development programs using                                                       x  x
manage their homes in a private service providers,                 training facilities at WDCs or in
                                                                   local communities.
socially and                      including NGOs, in their

environmentally sustainable households.

manner.

12. Ensure women's access to      Number of women-headed           In cooperation with MFIs and the MoWA, MFIs, CMA                    xxxxx
      secure financial services.  households receiving safe        Cambodia Micro-finance
                                  financial services provided by   Association (CMA), conduct
                                  MFIs.                            financial literacy programs for
                                                                   women.

13. Improve women's economic Number of women engaged in            In collaboration with LMs, NGOs    MoWA, MAFF, MRD, MoLVT, DPs      xxxxx
                                                                   and the private sector, provide                                            xxxx
opportunities so they have commercially viable farming,            training on innovative
                                                                   technologies and access to
the choice to work, earn gardening and off-farm                    information and knowledge.

income and invest in              economic activities in their

livelihoods.                      homes.

Women benefit from cross-border labour migration and risks are reduced

14. Promote and address           Number of women workers          Contribute to the development      MoWA, MoLVT and DPs/NGOs
                                                                   of policies and programs to
women migrant workers' safely and legally migrating for            support women migrant
                                                                   workers.
challenges in the process of temporary employment in

developing migration              ASEAN countries.

policies and other migration                                       In collaboration with MoLVT,
                                                                   conduct awareness programs for
programs.                                                          women about the benefits and
                                                                   risks of migration.

30 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
15. Ensure the reduction of       Number of offences against       In cooperation with MoLVT, MoI MoWA, MoLVT, MoI                                xxxx                x             x
      migration-related offences
      against Cambodian women     women migrant workers verified and NGOs, monitor official
      workers.
                                  by criminal records are declining. records of criminal offences

                                                                   against migrant women workers.

                                                                   In cooperation with MoLVT,          MoWA, migration resource

                                                                   conduct awareness programs for centres, recruitment agencies

                                                                   women on how to seek legal          and NGOs

                                                                   advice and protection in host

                                                                   countries.

2. ACCESS TO SOCIAL SERVICES AND PROTECTION

2.1. Education of Women and Girls and Attitudinal Change

Overall Objective/s: Promote gender equality in education; particularly increase access of women and girls in vulnerable groups to education services through awareness raising, social
accountability measures, scholarships and other financial assistance. Increase the participation of women in all areas of education service delivery and management and promote gender-
responsive social attitudes.

Strategies                        Indicators                       Key Activities                      Relevant Responsible                               Time Frame     Resources
                                                                                                       Ministries/Agencies                        14 15 16 17 18
                                                                                                                                                                      National  DP

                                                                                                                                                                      Budget Funding

The development and implementation of polices, programs and plans in the education sector are gender-responsive with attention being paid to vulnerable groups of women and
girls49

1. Improve technical capacity Capacity level of relevant           Coordinate and/or manage the        MoWA, MoEYS, relevant                      xxxxx                             x
                                                                                                       ministries
and commitment of                 officials in gender analysis in the collection and application (to

relevant officials on gender education sector.                     policies and programs) of

mainstreaming in policies, Gender analysis documents in            relevant and up-to-date sectoral
programs and planning in the education sector.                     data (broken down by region if

the education sector.             Report on research studies on    possible) and analysis to identify
                                  gender issues in education.      sectoral gender gaps.

                                  Number of policies, guidelines,
                                  programs, plans and budgets in
                                  the education sector that are
                                  gender-responsive.

49 Vulnerable groups include elderly women, women and girls with HIV, women and girls from ethnic minorities, women and girls with disabilities.

31 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
                                Conduct research to understand     MoWA, MoEYS, relevant  xxxxx     x
                                the emerging issues related to     ministries
                                gender and education, and
                                response measures.

                                Provide recommendations to         MoWA, MoEYS, relevant  xxxxx  x  x
                                MoEYS to address gender gaps       ministries
                                and M & E impacts, with a
                                particular focus on secondary
                                and higher education. Address
                                how to reach the most
                                vulnerable and the disabled.

                                Strengthen monitoring              MoWA, MoEYS, relevant  xxxxx  x  x

                                mechanisms for implementing ministries

                                gender mainstreaming programs

                                in the education sector.

                                Capacity development and           MoWA, MoEYS, relevant  xxxx   x  x
                                advocacy for gender                ministries
                                mainstreaming in the education
                                sector.

                                Coordinate and provide             MoWA, MoEYS, relevant  xxxxx  x  x
                                technical assistance in            ministries
                                integrating gender into policies,
                                programs, action plans and the
                                budget of the education sector,
                                including the 5-year strategic
                                plan and annual work plan of
                                MoEYS.

32 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
                                Report on gender audit in the     Capacity development for        MoEYS, MoWA, LMs      xx        x
                                education sector.                 relevant officials on gender
                                                                  auditing in education.

                                                                  Conduct gender audit in the
                                                                  education sector, including a
                                                                  gender review of existing
                                                                  policies, programs, plans and
                                                                  processes.

Reduce overage enrolment rate in Grade 1 and dropout rate in primary education, particularly in remote areas

2. Increase access to day care Number of new day care             Feasibility study on the need for MoWA, MoEYS, MoI    xxxxx  x  x
                                                                  early learning centres.
and community                   facilities/centres.
                                                                  Coordinate in addressing the
kindergarten facilities.                                          needs found in the study.

                                Number of dissemination events Develop and implement              MoWA, MoEYS MoI, DPs  xxxxx     x

                                and participating parents at the  education program for parents
                                community level, including        on the importance of child
                                remote areas and ethnic           protection, child development
                                minorities; and awareness-        and early education, including
                                                                  the importance of positive

                                raising program on the            education for pre-school

                                importance of positive education children.

                                for pre-school children.          Mainstream positive education
                                                                  in public awareness programs

                                                                  Monitor the community pre-
                                                                  school program, including
                                                                  parental/ community education
                                                                  and positive education for
                                                                  pre-school children.

33 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
Promotion of social welfare and positive attitudes toward gender equality

3. Coordinate the                The National Action Plan for     Update the National Action Plan    National Committee for         xxxxx  x  x
      development and            Upholding Social Morality and    for Upholding Social Morality      Upholding Social Morality and  xxxxx  x  x
      implementation of the      Women's and Khmer Family         and Women's and Khmer Family       Women's and Khmer Family              x  x
      National Action Plan for   Values.                          Values and coordinate its          Values                                x  x
      Upholding Social Morality                                   implementation.
      and Women's and Khmer      Number of public awareness-                                                                               x  x
      Family Values.             raising campaigns on social      Media campaign to disseminate National Committee for
                                 morality and positive attitudes
                                 towards gender equality and      main messages on social            Upholding Social Morality and
                                 women's empowerment.
                                                                  morality, positive attitudes       Women's and Khmer Family

                                                                  towards gender equality and        Values
                                                                  women's empowerment;

                                                                  promote culture of non-violence.

4. Promote positive images of Number of public awareness- Education campaign and                     MoWA, MoEYS, the media,        xxxxx

empowered women and raising campaigns and advocacy advocacy to promote girls'                        relevant ministries, DPs

girls, and gender-sensitive to promote girls' education and education and opportunities for

role models for men and opportunities for vocational              vocational training.

boys.                            training.

                                 Number of awareness-raising Creation and implementation of          MoWA, MoEYS, the media,        xxxxx
                                                                                                     relevant ministries, DPs
                                 programs on gender equality and awareness-raising program,

                                 the rights of vulnerable women including the right to education

                                 and girls to education.          of vulnerable women and girls,
                                                                  particularly those who are living

                                                                  with disabilities, HIV, are from

                                                                  ethnic minorities, are LGBT, or

                                                                  are victims of GBV.

                                 Number of open dialogues         Creation of forums, including MoEYS, sub-national authorities x x x x x

                                 between young men and women debates among high school and (SNA), MoWA, youth groups,

                                 about positive, progressive      university students to increase relevant ministries, CSOs

                                 gender relations and roles.      public awareness on gender

                                                                  equality and positive social

                                                                  attitudes.

34 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
                                Number of training courses,    Strengthen women's capacity in MoWA, relevant ministries, SNA, x x x x x  x  x
                                                                                                                                         x  x
                                awareness-raising campaigns, promoting gender equality at all DPs                                        x  X

                                interviews, workshops, and     levels through training courses,

                                public forums.                 awareness-raising forums,

                                                               interviews and workshops

                                                               related to promoting gender

                                                               equality, social morality,

                                                               women's well-being, and

                                                               reducing gender inequality at the

                                                               community level.

5. Conduct research studies on Findings from the report.       Conduct research studies on        MoWA, MoSVY, MoR, MoPT,   xxxxx
      the needs of vulnerable                                  gender discrimination against      relevant ministries, DPs
      women including the aging,                               vulnerable women and set up
      poor, disabled, ethnic                                   response measures.
      minorities and those living
      with HIV.

                                                               Research studies on the use of
                                                               telecommunication and
                                                               information technologies,
                                                               including social information
                                                               networks used for disseminating
                                                               information related to vulnerable
                                                               women and gender equality.

6. Promote Sub-national         Educational plans and budgets  Capacity building of sub-national MoWA, MoEYS, SNA, NCDD     xxxxx
                                                               administration to respond to
administration's                of the sub-national level are  gender issues in education,
                                                               including the needs of vulnerable
participation and               gender-responsive.             women and girls in the process
                                                               of designing and implementing
accountability for providing                                   sub-national plans and budgets.

comprehensive and

equitable education

services.

35 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
2.2. Health and Nutrition of Women and Girls, and HIV/AIDS

Overall Objective/s: Promote gender equality in the health sector by expanding women's access to information and quality, affordable health care, including reproductive, sexual and
psychological health, food security and nutrition, and prevention of communicable diseases such as malaria, HIV and STDs, and non-communicable diseases (eye care, cancer).

Strategies               Indicators                Key Activities                           Relevant          Responsible  Time Frame         Resources

                                                                                            Ministries/Agencies            14 15 16 17 18  National     DP
                                                                                                                                           Budget    Funding

Strengthen and expand mechanisms and strategies to support the development and implementation of gender-responsive national policies, programs and plans in the health sector,
including nutrition and HIV/AIDS

1. Build capacity and    Policies, plans and budgets Capacity development and advocacy for MoWA, MoH, DPs                  xxxxx                                                      x
                                                                                                                                                                                      x
commitment of relevant in the health sector are    gender mainstreaming in the health
                                                   sector.
officials on gender      gender-responsive.

mainstreaming in                                   Coordinate and provide technical         MoWA, MoH, DPs                 xxxxx           x
policies, planning and                             assistance in integrating gender into
budgeting in the health                            GMAPs, policies, programs, action plans
sector.                                            and budgets of the health sector.

                                                   Monitor and promote the
                                                   implementation of gender
                                                   mainstreaming programs in the health
                                                   sector.

2. Analyse and respond to New gender analysis reports Collect and update data and information MoH, MoWA, NIS               xxxxx           x                                          x

gender disparities in the on gender issues in the  on relevant issues to identify sectoral

health sector.           health sector.            gender gaps.

                                                   Make recommendations to MoH to
                                                   address gender gaps and promote
                                                   implementation.

                                                   Develop and implement M&E mechanism MoWA, MoH, NIS, DPs                 xxxxx           x                                          x
                                                   to monitor the effectiveness of responses
                                                   to gender issues in the health sector.

36 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
                                                      Develop capacity and experience on           MoH, MoWA                      xx        x

                                                      gender auditing, including the review of

                                                      policies, programs, plans and processes.

Promotion of gender equality in the development and implementation of action plans and budgets in the health sector at the sub-national level (reproductive and sexual health,
food security, nutrition, communicable and non-communicable diseases)

3. Analyse and address  Gender-responsive             Analyse women's access to health             MoWA, NCDD, MoH, sub-national  xxxx   x  x

gender gaps in lagging programs, plans and            services and gender gaps by geographic administration (SNA)

areas into programs,    budgets at the sub-national area to understand the differences and

plans and budgets at the level.                       identify appropriate responses for each

sub-national level.                                   specific target group.

                                                      Capacity building and advocacy with SNA MoWA, MoH, NCDD                     xxxx   x  x
                                                      and development partners in analysing
                                                      and responding to health-related gender
                                                      gaps (in specific geographical areas),
                                                      particularly in planning and budgeting at
                                                      the sub-national level.

4. Contribute to promote Number of IEC programs on IEC on access to health information and MoH, MoWA, SNA                         xxxxx  x  x

public awareness raising access to health information healthcare services, including

on reproductive, sexual and healthcare services, reproductive, sexual and psychological

and psychological       including reproductive,       health, food security, nutrition,

health, food security and sexual and psychological prevention of communicable diseases

nutrition. Protection   health, food security,        such as malaria, HIV and STDs, and

against communicable nutrition, prevention of         non-communicable diseases (eye care,

diseases such as malaria, communicable diseases       cancer) for the target groups, particularly

HIV/AIDS and STDs, and such as malaria, HIV and for women and children.

non-communicable        STDs, and non-

diseases such as eye    communicable diseases (eye

diseases and cancer.    care, cancer) for the target

                        groups, particularly for

                        women and children.

37 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
                                                   Work with relevant stakeholders and SNA MoWA, MoH, SNA
                                                   to implement the IEC program at the
                                                   community level on access to health
                                                   information and healthcare services,
                                                   including reproductive, sexual and
                                                   psychological health, food security,
                                                   nutrition, prevention of communicable
                                                   diseases such as malaria, HIV and STDs,
                                                   and non-communicable diseases (eye
                                                   care, cancer) for the target groups,
                                                   particularly for women and children.

Gender-responsive development and implementation of strategic plan related to reproductive health, food security, nutrition, communicable and non-communicable diseases

5. Strengthen gender      Maternal health is prioritized Participate in promoting the            MoH, MoI, SNAs  xxxxx                   x                               x

mainstreaming and         in the National Health   implementation of the National Health

women's empowerment Strategic Plan                 Strategic Plan, prioritizing maternal

in health-related                                  health issues.

national strategic plans  Gender-responsive        Participate in the implementation of the MoH, MoWA            xxx                     xx
and programs.

                          implementation of National National Strategy for Reproductive and

                          Strategy for Reproductive Sexual Health 2012-2016, from a gender

                          and Sexual Health        perspective.

                          2012-2016.

                          Number of health centres Participate in promoting the                  GBV Working Group, MoH, MoWA x x x x x  x                               x

                          receiving package of     implementation of NAPVAW II,

                          medical care for survivors of particularly in setting up a package of

                          gender-based violence    medical care and referral mechanisms

                          (GBV).                   within the Health Care System for

                          Number of `referral cases' survivors of GBV.

                          from/to health centres.

38 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
                      Emergency Obstetric and     Participate in promoting gender           NAA, MoWA                   xx              xx
                      Newborn Care (EmONC)        mainstreaming in EmONC Improvement
                      Improvement Plan 2010-      Plan 2010-2015.
                      2015.

                      National Strategic Plan on  Coordinate and monitor the                MoWA                        xx              xX
                      HIV/AIDS 2011-2015.
                                                  implementation of the National Strategic

                                                  Plan on HIV/AIDS 2011-2015.

                                                  Implement the Strategic Plan on Women MoWA
                                                  and Girls and HIV/AIDS in Cambodia.

2.3. Legal Protection for Women and Girls

Overall Objective: To reduce all forms of violence against women and girls through effective implementation of the National Action Plan to Prevent Violence Against Women Phase II (NAPVAW
II) (2014-2018) and National Action Plan to Fight Human Trafficking (2014-2018).

Strategies            Indicators                  Key Activities                            Relevant   Responsible      Time Frame         Resources

                                                                                            Ministries/Agencies         14 15 16 17 18  National  DP

                                                                                                                                        Budget Funding

Gender is mainstreamed in Judicial Reform and the Legal System

1. Continue engendering Laws, new policies and    Participate in drafting laws, and         MoWA, CNCW, MoJ             xxxxx           x             x
                                                                                                                                                      x
laws, regulations and relevant regulations for the monitoring or amending policies to       MoWA, CNCW, MoJ, MoEYS,
                                                                                            Royal Academy for Judicial
policies and address  justice system are reviewed ensure they are gender-responsive and     Professions

violence against women, to ensure they are gender- include marginalized women and girls.

migrants and          responsive and consider

marginalized women and marginalized women and

girls.                girls.

                      Increased number of female  Coordinate in developing partnership                                  xx  xx          x
                      judges, prosecutors and     strategies in the context of the Working
                      lawyers.                    Group on Legal and Judicial Reform to
                                                  promote gender equality.

39 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
                                                     Create more scholarships for women/                                       xxxx   x  x
                                                     young women so that they can study law
                                                     and upgrade their degrees; increase                                              x  x
                                                     women's representation as judges,                                                x  x
                                                     prosecutors and lawyers.                                                         x  x

                                                     Advocate for the increase of women's
                                                     representation in the justice system and
                                                     capacity building of female judges and
                                                     prosecutors.

2. Identify specific    Laws and regulations are Coordinate the revision of regulations, MoWA, MoJ, MoI                        xxxxx

measures to address GBV revised from a gender        formulate and launch guidelines, and

and discrimination      perspective.                 build the capacity of relevant actors to

against marginalized    Number of cases of violence  provide legal protection for women with
women and girls in      against women where          disabilities, women engaged in
collaboration with      offenders are convicted.     prostitution and women working in the
relevant stakeholders.                               men's entertainment sector.

                        Minutes and agendas of       Initiate high-level discussions with       MoWA, MoSVY, DPs, CSOs         xxxxx
                        meetings and workshops.      relevant stakeholders, including LGBT
                                                     people, to prepare strategies to promote
                                                     the rights of and end discrimination
                                                     against LGBT people in schools, the work
                                                     place, communities and families.

                        Reports and practical        Undertake further studies to identify the MoWA, MoSVY, relevant agencies  xxx

                        recommendations of studies root causes of women working in

                        are gender-responsive and prostitution. Use these as a basis to

                        cover the factors that lead to design effective interventions/measures

                        the provision of sex services. for problem solving and new programs to

                                                     support women who are planning to look

                                                     for new jobs outside the sex industry.

40 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
                        Agreement on interventions     Initiate discussions with relevant      MoWA, MoSVY, relevant agencies  xxx    x  x
                        to address issues related to   stakeholders to identify solutions for
                        the sex industry.              women working in prostitution                                                  x  x
                                                       (discussions should consider the                                               x  x
                                                       possibility of punishing those who buy                                         x  x
                                                       sex services).                                                                 x  x
                                                                                                                                      x  x
The National Action Plan to Prevent Violence Against Women Phase II (NAPVAW II) (2014-2018) is implemented effectively                x  x

3. Coordination in the  The number of TWGG-GBV Organize and facilitate TWGG-GBV                MoWA, LMs, DPs                  xxxxx

implementation of       meetings.                      meetings regularly.

NAPVAW II (2014-2018)   Reports of relevant            Coordinate the dissemination of NAPVAW MoWA, CNCW, MoJ, PDWAs and       x
through TWGG-GBV        institutions that participate  II at national and sub-national levels, DPs                             xxxx
under the PBA           in implementing NAPVAW II      with line ministries, provincial
framework.              (2014-2018) at national and    institutions and departments.
                        sub-national levels show
                        sufficient budget to           Coordinate and mobilize resources for MoWA, LMs, DPs
                        implement the activities.      the implementation of planned activities
                                                       on the prevention of domestic violence

                                                       and prepare the TWG-GBV operational

                                                       plan.

                                                       Prepare and disseminate a progress      MoWA, LMs, DPs                  xxxx
                                                       report on NAPVAW II through the
                                                       TWGG-GBV.

                                                       Organize mid-term and annual            MoWA, LMs, DPs                  xxxx
                                                       workshops to monitor the
                                                       implementation of strategic areas of
                                                       NAPVAW II.

                                                       Implement practical measures to solve   MoWA, LMs, DPs                  xxxx
                                                       problems related to violence against
                                                       vulnerable women and girls, especially
                                                       girls with disabilities.

41 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
                                                       Conduct research about violence against MoWA, LMs, DPs                    xxxxx  x  x
                                                       vulnerable women and girls and share                                      xxxxx  x  x
                                                       results with the TWGG-GBV.
                                                                                                                                 xxxxx  x  x
4. Develop and use systems Reports on data collection  Collect and monitor data (DCMS) used by MoWA, LMs, DPs                    xxxxx  x  x
                                                       the Ministry of Women's Affairs (MoWA)                                    xxxxx  x  x
for baseline data and system and monitoring of         and other relevant stakeholders to
                                                       monitor and evaluate the
monitoring of data  data related to GBV are            implementation of NAPVAW II.

related to all forms of developed and

GBV. disseminated during

                    TWGG-GBV.

                    Final report and results of Collect data on services provided to              MoP, NIS, MoJ, MoWA
                                                                                                  MoWA, NIS
                    the survey on the prevalence victims of GBV.

                    of violence against women          Incorporate data from the survey in the
                    and children.                      National Statistical System.

5. Promote public   Knowledge of local                 Disseminate GBV-related laws and           MoWA, MoI, local authorities,

awareness about laws, authorities and                  regulations to the general public.         PDWA

regulations and services communities about laws,       Organize forums to disseminate laws and
related to the prevention regulations and services     related policies to local authorities and
of GBV and migration. related to the prevention of     commune council members, especially
                                                       about GBV.
                                  GBV is increased.

42 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
6. Increase quantity and Number of trained MoWA Enhance the capacity of MoWA's Judicial MoWA, MoJ    xxxxx                               x  x
                                                                                                                                         x  x
capacity of MoWA's      Judicial Police Officers     Police Officers through legal and

Judicial Police Officers at increased from 141 to 525 by socio-psychological training to assist
                                                     victims.
both national and       2018.

sub-national levels to  Increased capacity of        Develop organizational chart, roles,
assist GBV victims.     Judicial Police Officers.    responsibilities and mandate of MoWA
                                                     judicial police, as well as legal

                                                     procedures.

                                                     Develop Prakas on the nomination of
                                                     judicial police agents at district/khan level.

                                                     Develop and disseminate guidelines for
                                                     the judicial police of MoWA and PDWA.

                                                     Cooperate with relevant institutions to
                                                     provide training to judicial police agents
                                                     to ensure that they are fully capable of
                                                     carrying out their duties.

7. Strengthen and expand One-stop service centres for Coordinate with line institutions to set up MoWA, MoJ, MoI, MoH, MoSVY, x x x x x

One-Stop Services for survivors of GBV will be       and operate one-stop service centres. NGOs

victims of GBV.         established in at least two Increase coordination and collaboration

                        provinces.                   between the Government, service

                        Number of survivors          providers, private sector and relevant
                        receiving one-stop services  agencies/ institutions to promote a
                        from centres in two target   coordinated response strategy at
                                                     sub-national level.

                        provinces.                   Develop a communication strategy,

                        Increased number of          including hotline number, internet and

                        survivors receiving legal    media campaign, focusing on the most

                        consultation services related at-risk groups of women.

                        to divorce by 2018.          Set up a referral system for survivors of
                                                     violence against women.

                                                     Organize study tours in-country and
                                                     overseas to exchange experiences related
                                                     to the development of one-stop service
                                                     centres to assist victims of GBV.

43 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
The National Plan of Action to Fight Human Trafficking (2014-2018) is implemented effectively

8. Contribute to the       Report on the               Capacity development of relevant people Cambodian COMMIT Task Force, x x x x x  x  x

implementation of the implementation of the            at the sub-national level on gender and MoWA, MoI,

National Plan of Action    National Plan of Action to  labour migration; and at village level to   International Collaboration
to Fight Human             Fight Human Trafficking     prevent human trafficking and               Committee
Trafficking, (2014-2018).  (2014-2018).                exploitation in target provinces.

                                                       Awareness raising at the village level to
                                                       prevent human trafficking, exploitation,
                                                       GBV and migration in target provinces.

                                                       Increase public awareness about
                                                       regulations and services related to the
                                                       prevention of human trafficking, GBV and
                                                       migration through radio, public events,
                                                       round-table dialogue, meetings,
                                                       workshops and media.

                                                       Organize national Anti-Human Trafficking
                                                       Day on 12 December every year.

                                                       Coordinate mainstreaming gender and
                                                       migration in the plans of line ministries/
                                                       institutions.

44 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
9. Contribute to the       Report on the           Continue to implement the Third Action MoWA, COMMIT, International    xxxxx  x  x

development and            implementation of the Third Plan to combat Trafficking in Persons in Collaboration Committee

effective implementation and Fourth Action Plan to the Greater Mekong Sub-Region.

of the Third and Fourth    combat Trafficking in   Continue to implement the agreement
Action Plan to Combat      Persons in the Greater  between Cambodia and Vietnam based
Trafficking in Persons in  Mekong Sub-Region       on the Action Plan agreed by the two
the Greater Mekong         (2015-2018).            countries.
Sub-Region (2015-2018).
                                                   Continue to implement and amend the

                                                   MoU on the Greater Mekong Sub-region.

                                                   Continue to implement the MoU between
                                                   Cambodia and Thailand after
                                                   amendments for year 2014.

                                                   Fast track the signing of the MoU
                                                   between Cambodia and Malaysia,
                                                   develop an action plan.

                                                   Conduct research on the prevalence of
                                                   Cambodian human trafficking in China in
                                                   order to develop a MoU for the two
                                                   countries.

                                                   Deliver training on the strategy to combat
                                                   human trafficking at the provincial level.

                                                   Develop and implement the Fourth
                                                   Action Plan to Combat Trafficking in
                                                   Persons in the Greater Mekong Sub-
                                                   Region (2015-2018).

                                                   Organize the tenth meeting of high-level
                                                   COMMIT officials and the fourth
                                                   Ministerial meeting about COMMIT
                                                   processes.

45 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
3. CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES

3.1. Promoting Women's Participation in Decision-Making, and Mainstreaming Gender in RGC Policies and Programs.

Overall Objective: Promote gender equality in decision-making at all levels and mainstream gender in policies, sectoral plans, and key reform programs of RGC.

Strategies                    Indicator                    Key Activities                             Relevant Responsible               Time Frame             Resources
                                                                                                      Ministries/Agencies        14 15 16 17 18
                                                                                                                                                                National  DP

                                                                                                                                                                Budget Funding

Increased women's participation in decision-making at all levels of the civil service and in political positions

1. Increase proportion of     Percentage of women civil Coordinate/collaborate with MCS and           MCS, MoWA, CNCW, GMAGs of  xxxxx                          xx
      women participating in                                                                          LMs                        xxxxx
      the civil service.      servants increased from 37 gender mainstreaming action groups
                                                                                                      MCS, MoWA, CNCW, GMAGs of
                              percent to 40 percent.       (GMAGs) of line ministries (LMs) on the    LMs

                              Proportion of women civil    selection of new female civil servants,
                              servants in decision-making  and the increase from 20 percent to 50
                              positions (from DG to Head   percent; monitor progress.

                              of Offices) increased from 19 Cooperate and advocate with LMs on the                                                              xx

                              percent to 25 percent.       promotion of women; their access to

                                                           capacity development programs; and

                                                           extend the retirement age of women in

                                                           the armed forces.

                                                           Update gender statistics in the civil
                                                           service, especially women in leadership
                                                           positions at all levels.

                                                           Advocate for increased numbers of          MCS, MoWA, NCD             xxxxx                          xx
                                                                                                                                                                xx
                                                           women in recruitment and promotion at

                                                           the sub-national level.

                                                           Coordinate the development and             MoWA, MCS, MoI, LMs, and CSOs x x x x x

                                                           implementation of a strategic framework

                                                           for the promotion of women's

                                                           empowerment in political and public life.

46 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
2. Strengthen the capacity Number of women civil         Develop and implement capacity             MoWA, RSA, NCDD and MoI        xxxxx  x  x

and ability of women servants receiving capacity development program for women in                                                  xxxxx  x  x
                                                                                                                                   xxxxx  x  x
civil servants and women development, training on decision-making at national and                                                  xxxxx  x  x
                                                                                                                                   xxxxx  x  x
in decision-making to leadership and procedures. sub-national levels to increase their

fulfil their roles and     Number of trained women       capacity to fulfil their roles.
responsibilities.          in decision-making            Build the capacity of women in decision- MoWA, RSA, NCDD and MoI

                           implementing their roles making positions in leadership,

                           effectively.                  advocacy, negotiation, discussion and

                                                         gender mainstreaming.

                                                         Strengthen network of women in             MoWA, RSA, NCDD and MoI

                                                         decision-making at the sub-national level

                                                         for support and sharing experience and

                                                         lessons learned.

                                                         Monitor and evaluate the capacity of       MoWA, RSA, NCDD and MoI
                                                         trained women.

3. Increase proportion of  Proportion of female MPs Hold discussion forum to share                  MoWA, CNCW, NEC, political
      women in political                                                                            parties, MoP, MCS, MoIn, CSOs
      positions.           increased from 20 percent to information and experiences of other        and DPs

                           30 percent.                   countries on how to increase women's

                           Proportion of female          participation in politics.

                           Senators increased from

                           14.75 percent to 30 percent.

                           Proportion of female
                           members of capital/
                           provincial councils
                           increased from 13.2 percent
                           to 15 percent.

                           Proportion of female
                           members of municipality/

47 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
                         district/khan councils      Study and collect data on the               MoWA, CNCW, NCDD, Political    xxxxx  x  x
                                                                                                 Parties, MoInfo, NGOs          x xx   x  x
                         increased from 13.8 percent participation of vulnerable groups in
                                                                                                                                x xx   x  x
                         to 20 percent.              political and public life.
                                                                                                                                xxxxx  x  x
                         Proportion of female        Facilitate advocacy with political parties  MoWA, CNCW, NCDD, Political
                         members of commune/         to include women on candidate lists         Parties, MoInfo, NGOs          xx     x  x
                         sangkat councils increased  among those who are more likely to be                                      xxx    x  x
                         from 17.78 percent to 25    elected.                                                                   xxxxx  x  x
                         percent.                                                                                               xxxxx  x  x

                                                     Develop a program and campaign to           MoWA, CNCW, NCDD, Political
                                                     promote awareness and support an            Parties, MoInfo, NGOs
                                                     increase in women's participation in
                                                     politics.

                         Proportion of young women Study, design and coordinate the              MoWA, education institutions,
                                                                                                 youth network and DPs
                         participating in politics,  implementation of programs to promote

                         especially in political parties young women in politics.

                         and as representatives at

                         sub-national levels.

Development and implementation of the Government's policies, plans and programs are gender-responsive

4. Update and disseminate CGA 2018 produced and      Coordinate the development of CGA.          MoWA, LMs, DPs

Cambodia Gender          disseminated.

Assessment (CGA) and                                 Dissemination campaign and advocacy. MoWA

ensure key national      Statistical systems and     Update and disseminate gender statistics MoWA, NIS
statistical systems are  surveys are gender-         on a regular basis (national and sub-
gender-responsive.       responsive.                 national).

                                                     Collaborate and provide technical           MoWA, NIS
                                                     assistance for gender mainstreaming in
                                                     national statistical systems and surveys.

48 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
5. Strengthen gender-       Consistency between NR IV, Technical assistance, coordination and   MoWA, MoP, GMAGs, TWGG    xxxxx  x  x
                                                                                                                                    x
responsive national and NSDP, PIP and JMIs.            monitoring of gender mainstreaming in                                        x

sectoral strategies.                                   NSDP and sectoral programs.                                                  x
                                                                                                                                    x
                                                       Coordinate the monitoring of the         MoWA, MoP, GMAGs, TWGG    xxxxx  x  x
                                                       implementation of NR IV, NSDP, CMDGs,
                                                       PIP, JMIs, and GMAPs.                                                        x

                            The first National Policy on Draft National Policy on Gender Equality MoWA, CNCW, TWG-G, CoM  xxxxx  x
                            Gender Equality developed reviewed.

                                                                  Consultation on the draft policy on
                                                                  gender equality

Gender-responsive development and implementation of RGC reform programs

6. Cooperate in             Gender is mainstreamed in  Collaboration and technical assistance in MoWA, NCDD, LMs          xxxxx  x
      mainstreaming gender  IP3 phases 1 and 2 and in  gender mainstreaming in IP3 phases 1
      into Implementation   sub-programs.              and 2 and in sub-programs.
      Plans of NP-NSDD.
                                                       Collaboration with NCDD Secretariat to   MoWA, NCDD, LMs           xxxxx  x
                                                       review and advise on gender
                                                       mainstreaming in the annual action plan
                                                       and budget plan.

                            M&E framework is           Collaboration with NCDD Secretariat to MoWA, NCDD, LMs             xxxxx  x
                            developed and              monitor and evaluate the gender
                            implemented.               mainstreaming process and women's
                                                       empowerment in IP3 sub-programs, with
                                                       recommendations to NCDD.

                            Strengthened capacity of   Technical assistance and capacity        MoWA, NCDD, LMs           xxxxx  x
                            PDWA and DOWA in the
                            context of D&D.            building to PDWA, permanent deputies of

                                                       WCCCs and CCWCs in the implementation

                                                       of gender mainstreaming and women's

                                                       empowerment.

49 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
                              Case study at the sub-       Produce case study on gender              MoWA, NCDD             xxx      x  x
                                                                                                                                        x
                              national level produced and mainstreaming at the sub-national level,
                                                                                                                                        x
                              disseminated.                based on the NCDD gender audit.                                              x
                                                                                                                                        x
7. Ensure that policies,      Gender-responsive policies,  Collaborate with the Ministry of Civil    MoWA, MCS, GMAGs, RSA  xxxxx    x  x
      plans, programs, legal  programs and other           Service and relevant ministries to
      regulations and         documents.                   integrate gender equality measures into
      processes related to                                 five-year policy/strategy of PAR and
      Public Administration   Challenges of gender         annual plans.
      Reform (PAR) are        mainstreaming in PAR
      gender-responsive.      identified.

                                                           Collaboration in conducting gender audit MoWA, MCS, GMAGs, RSA        xx  x
                                                           in PAR: analysis and strategy for gender
                                                           mainstreaming in institutions, planning,
                                                           processes and outcomes.

                                                           Collaboration and technical assistance    MoWA, MCS, GMAGs, RSA  xxxxx    x
                                                           for gender mainstreaming in public
                                                           administration management and service
                                                           provider training programs.

                              Gender-responsive training   Collaboration with the Royal School of    MoWA, MCS, RSA, MoEYS  xxxxx    x
                              program for capacity         Administration (RSA) and the Ministry of
                              building of civil servants.  Civil Service to provide training on
                                                           gender.

                                                           Technical assistance to teacher training MoWA, MCS, RSA, MoEYS   xxxxx    x
                                                           centres and other training institutions.

50 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
8. Cooperate with line   Number of ministries/       Work with MEF to integrate gender in      MEF, MoWA, GMAGs of LMs, SNEC x x x x x  x  x
                                                                                                                                        x  x
ministries to ensure they institutions receiving     annual action plan and budget.                                                     x  X

receive national budget  national budget for gender  Integrate GMAP of LMs into ministries'
for gender               mainstreaming.              strategic plans and budgets to ensure
mainstreaming through                                support of national budget from MEF.
the public financial
management reform                                    Training on gender-responsive planning
program                                              and budgeting.

9. Promote women's access Proportion of women who Collaborate with the Ministry of Land MoWA, MLMUPC, Council for x x x x x

to and control over land have land titles.           Management, Urban Planning and            Land Reform

rights through gender                                Construction to promote the

mainstreaming in the                                 implementation of land-related laws,

land reform program.                                 policies and programs for the benefit of

                                                     women.

                         Laws, policies and programs Continue to build capacity and            MoWA, MLMUPC, Council for x x x x x

                         related to land reform are mainstream gender in laws, policies and Land Reform

                         responsive to gender and programs related to land reform.

                         vulnerable groups.

51 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
3.2. Climate Change, Green Growth and Disaster Risk Management

Overall Objective/s: Promote gender equality in processes and policy implementation related to climate change, green growth and disaster risk management within line ministries and
institutions at national and sub-national levels, to reduce the impacts on women and vulnerable women, and to contribute to and benefit from green growth.

Strategies           Indicator                   Key Activities                            Relevant Responsible           Time Frame  Resources
                                                                                           Ministries/Agencies

                                                                                                                          14 15 16 17 18 National DP
                                                                                                                                                                Budget Funding

Gender-responsive policies, programs and strategies on climate change, green growth and disaster risk management

1. Strengthen capacity and Capacity development  Develop and implement Capacity            MoWA                           x x xx      xx

support of senior officials program on gender in climate Development program on gender in  National Council for Green
                                                                                           Growth (NCGG)
and technical staff in change, green growth and climate change, green growth and
                                                                                           National Climate Change
gender mainstreaming in disaster risk management for disaster risk management.             Committee (NCCC)

the climate change,  the working group at national Capacity Development for the working    National Council for Disaster
green growth and     and sub-national level is                                             Management (NCDM)
disaster risk                                    group and relevant stakeholders at the
management program.  developed and integrated                                              Ministry of Interior (MoI)
                                                 sub-national level on gender in climate
                     into national programs of                                             NCDD
                                                 change, green growth and disaster risk
                     relevant sectors.
                                                 management.

52 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
2. Mainstream gender in       Policies, programs and        Conduct a gender review of existing       MoWA, NCGG, NCCC, NCDM  x x x xx  x  x
      the development         strategic plans on climate    policies, programs, plans and                                                  x
      processes and           change, green growth and      mechanisms, including national policies,
      implementation of       disaster risk management are  strategic plans and programs.
      policies, programs and  gender-responsive.
      strategies on climate                                 Coordination and technical support in
      change, green growth                                  the integration of gender in the
      and disaster risk                                     development and implementation of
      management.                                           policy, programs, action plans and
                                                            budgets of relevant sectors, with
                                                            participation from CSOs, the private
                                                            sector and development partners (DP).

                                                            Collaboration and coordination with the
                                                            Secretariat of the Cambodia National
                                                            Committee for Climate Change to
                                                            integrate guidelines on the impact
                                                            assessment of climate change on gender
                                                            to line ministries/institutions.

                                                            Create monitoring and evaluation
                                                            framework on gender and climate
                                                            change, green growth and disaster risk
                                                            management, for monitoring and
                                                            evaluation and promoting gender
                                                            mainstreaming in line ministries.

                              Climate change is             Integrating climate change, green growth MoWA                     x x x xx  x

                              mainstreamed in the program and disaster risk management measures

                              of MoWA.                      into MoWA programs.

53 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
3. Ensure equal           Percentage of women and Increase representation of women and NCCC, Ministry of Environment x x x x x   x  x
                                                                                                                                 x  x
participation of women vulnerable women                vulnerable groups in seminars, fora and (MoE), MoWA, NCDD, DPs

and vulnerable women participating in consultation networking at international and national

and the inclusion of      processes, implementation levels.

gender issues in          and follow-up actions on     Conduct gender audit particularly on the
coordination and          climate change at            gaps in empowerment of women and
advocacy on climate       international, national and  vulnerable groups in climate change,
change at international,  sub-national levels.         green growth and disaster risk
national and sub-                                      management in order to prepare gender
national levels.                                       responsive measures.

                                                       Gender mainstreaming in climate change
                                                       development plans at sub-national level.

4. Reduce the impacts of Specific needs of women and Collaborate and coordinate with the            NCDM, NCCC, MoWA   x x x xx

climate change and        vulnerable women are         national committees, line ministries and

disasters on women and addressed in the process of DPs to mainstream gender in national

vulnerable women.         climate change response and strategies on climate change and disaster

                          disaster risk management. risk management, and relevant

                                                       mechanisms, including setting up

                                                       effective feedback mechanisms for

                                                       transparency, accountability and equality

                                                       in response to disasters for the benefit of

                                                       women and vulnerable women.

                                                       Initiatives for program design and
                                                       activities in response to actual needs,
                                                       such as personal safety and security,
                                                       access to water, medication, health care
                                                       and treatment, food, safe shelters and
                                                       sanitation for women and vulnerable
                                                       women are incorporated into disaster
                                                       risk management and response.

54 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
5. Increase women's           Number of women                Collaboration and coordination with         MoWA, NCGG, NCCC, MoE,     x x x xx  x  x
      participation in green  participating in green growth  NCGG, MoE, MAFF, line ministries, DPs       MAFF, DPs and the private               X
      growth activities.      activities.                    and the private sector to ensure            sector
                                                             increased participation of women in
                                                             green growth activities.

New studies on gender and climate change, green growth and disaster risk management

6. Create new innovative Number of studies on gender Collaboration in implementation and MoWA, NCDM, NCGG, NCCC,                    x x x xx  x

schemes and activities to and climate change, green evaluation of the new pilot projects for MAFF, MoE, DPs, CSOs

address gender issues in growth and disaster risk            addressing gender issues in climate

climate change, green management.                            change, green growth and disaster risk

growth and disaster risk                                     management

management which are                                         (e.g. alternative energy production
tested and proposed to                                       processes) and disaster risk management
line ministries for                                          (e.g. sanitation, personal safety and food
integration into regular                                     security).
ongoing programs.
                                                             Conduct research on the impact of

                                                             natural disasters on women and

                                                             vulnerable women in collaboration with

                                                             NCDM.

                                                             Conduct a study on the roles and
                                                             contributions of women, especially
                                                             vulnerable women, in forest and natural
                                                             resource management, in collaboration
                                                             with MAFF, MoE and relevant ministries.

55 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
4. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Development toward Gender Equality

Overall Objective: To strengthen the institutional structure and capacity to promote gender equality through program-based approaches (PBA) and good governance, which includes
vulnerable groups of women and girls.

Strategies                     Indicators                         Key Activities                         Relevant Responsible Ministries/      Time Frame  Resources

                                                                                                         Agencies                          14  15 16 17 18 National              DP

                                                                                                                                                           Budget Funding

MoWA and the national machinery structure reflect new functions as catalysts, policy advocates, advisors and facilitators

1. Assess institutional and    Report on institutional and        Conduct institutional assessment of MoWA, CNCW, GMAGs, SNAs              xx              xx
      national machinery       national machinery functions       the national machinery for
      functions for promoting  for promoting gender equality,     promoting gender equality and
      gender equality.         including recommendations          women's empowerment.
                               related to harmonizing and
                               strengthening these                Prepare mapping of DP functions in
                               machineries.                       promoting gender equality at
                                                                  national and sub-national levels,
                               Report on mapping                  including government institutions,
                               development partner functions      DPs and civil society organizations
                               in promoting gender equality.      (CSOs).

2. Revise structures, roles    Revised and operational            Develop and disseminate                MoWA, CNCW, TWGG                  xxx             xx
      and responsibilities of  institutional structure,           administrative letters and
      national machinery for   mechanisms and national            guidelines for revising structure,
      promoting gender         network with specific roles and    mechanisms and gender-related
      equality.                responsibilities for each entity.  networks, with clear roles and
                                                                  responsibilities.

                                                                  Coordinate and provide technical
                                                                  support; monitor the new
                                                                  restructuring process and network,
                                                                  including roles and responsibilities;
                                                                  provide assistance to the machinery
                                                                  for promoting gender equality.

56 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
MoWA and the national machinery are able to carry out new functions as catalysts, policy advocates, advisors and facilitators for promoting gender equality

3. Conduct capacity           Report on capacity needs  Create an institutional development MoWA, CNCW, TWGG, LMs  xxx                                       x  x
                                                        expert team to facilitate capacity                                                                   x  x
assessment for each           assessment and capacity   assessment for each entity.                                                                          x  x

entity following the          development program for   Conduct an assessment and
                                                        produce a detailed capacity
restructuring process (in MoWA, CNCW, TWGG and SNA.     development plan for each entity.

accordance with the

revised structure and

network).

4. Develop capacity           Capacity development materials Prepare guidelines and capacity   MoWA                x xx
      development materials
      for training under the  are developed.            development materials for each
      capacity development
      program.                                          entity of the capacity development

                                                        plan.

5. Develop the capacity of MoWA capacity for conducting Strengthen capacity within MoWA MoWA                       x x xx

MoWA to be able to            capacity assessment and   on training needs assessment and

conduct capacity              capacity development to LMs on create capacity development pro-
assessments (gender
audits) and capacity          gender mainstreaming.     gram on gender mainstreaming

                                                        across sectors.

development for line                                    Recruit sector-specific gender spe-
ministries (LM) to                                      cialists who can advise and counsel
promote gender equality                                 MoWA technical departments,
across sectors.                                         GMAGs and LMs on strategic the

                                                        needs of vulnerable women and

                                                        girls.

                                                        Continue to set up and provide sup-
                                                        port to sectoral sub-groups under
                                                        the TWGG to strengthen harmoniza-
                                                        tion of stakeholders' efforts in spe-
                                                        cific thematic areas.

                                                        Create a mechanism to work with
                                                        LMs to integrate GMAPs in sectoral
                                                        strategies and relevant national ac-
                                                        tion plans.

57 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
6. Strengthen MoWA      MoWA capacity for planning, Strengthen capacity within MoWA, MoWA                             x x x xx  x  x

capacity for planning, M&E, sector-specific gender      including PDWA for gender situation

M&E, sector-specific    analysis and gender             and policy analysis: data collection,

gender analysis and     mainstreaming in policies,      analysis and policy formulation.

gender mainstreaming in planning and programs.

policies, planning and  Capacity of MoWA to do gender Strengthen MoWA capacity on data
programs.

                        analysis and to produce the     collection and analysis and policy

                        Cambodia Gender Assessment analysis, particularly for producing

                        2018 (CGA).                     the CGA 2018, reporting on

                        Creation and dissemination of   prioritized gender-related planning
                        gender-responsive indicators.   and costing of gender
                                                        mainstreaming of LMs.
                        High-quality reports which are

                        credible and acceptable by DPs

                        and CSOs.

Government agencies are capable of incorporating measures to promote gender equality into their programs and budgets

7. Strengthen GMAGs'    LM policies, plans and budgets Capacity assessment of GMAGs on MoWA, LMs, DPs                 x x xx    x  X

capacity to integrate   are gender-responsive, with     gender-related knowledge, gender

gender equality into their particular attention being paid analysis and gender mainstreaming,

LM policies, plans and to vulnerable groups of women including the strategic needs of

budgets. Capacity of    and girls.                      women and girls and those in

national machinery is                                   vulnerable groups.

increased and                                           Capacity development for GMAGs,
harmonized, and                                         relevant DPs and MoWA officials on
sector-specific in                                      gender mainstreaming and gender
approach.                                               analysis by sector.

58 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
8. Capacity development for Line departments at the              Capacity needs assessment of           MoWA, LMs, DPs  x xx      x  X
                                                                 gender working groups at the
gender working groups of sub-national level are capable          sub-national level.

line departments on            of mainstreaming gender in

integrating gender in          policies, plans and budgets in    Capacity development for relevant
sectoral policies, plans and   their own sectors.                staff at the sub-national level
budgets at the sub-na-                                           through GMAGs on gender
tional level.                                                    mainstreaming and monitoring.

9. Strengthening               National and sub-national         Ordinary and extraordinary             CNCW            x x x xx  x  x
      mechanisms for           mechanisms are clearly defined    meetings of CNCW and annual
      promoting gender         and operate smoothly in CNCW      meetings to strengthen and
      equality, aligning with  meetings.                         promote the implementation of
      CNCW for the                                               laws, gender equality and CEDAW
      implementation of        The responsibilities of relevant  concluding observations.
      national laws, policies  stakeholders in the
      and CEDAW.               implementation of CEDAW           Dissemination campaign and
                               continue to improve according     advocacy with senior officials at the
                               to plan.                          national and sub-national level to
                                                                 promote the implementation of

                                                                 CEDAW.

                                                                 Coordinate and promote
                                                                 consistency and strengthen
                                                                 mechanisms for promoting gender
                                                                 equality and women's
                                                                 empowerment in the CNCW agenda.

                                                                 Monitor the implementation of laws
                                                                 and the CEDAW concluding
                                                                 observations, and provide
                                                                 recommendations to the
                                                                 Government.

59 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
The 5-year MoWA strategic plan is implemented with PBAs toward gender equality

10. Implement a PBA towards Costed programs for WEE/  Finalize and agree detailed costed MoWA, TWGG, DPs      x xx      xx
                                                      program that will be used as the
gender equality.  NAPVAW and capacity                 basis for each PBA, particularly WEE
                                                      and NAPVAW programs.
                  development.

                  MoUs with implementing              Clearly delineate roles and            MoWA, TWGG, DPs  x xx      xx
                  agencies.
                                                      responsibilities for each stakeholder

                                                      (MoWA, LM, CSOs) in the PBA. Each

                                                      will have its own mini costed work

                                                      plan and associated budget. Ensure

                                                      that these are fully integrated into

                                                      their regular plans and budgets.

                                                      MoUs with other stakeholders (LMs,
                                                      CSOs).

                  MoUs with DPs.                      Confirm financial support and          MoWA, TWGG, DPs  x x xx    x  x
                                                      modality from DPs and preparation
                                                      of MoU with each DP and with
                                                      relevant ministries.

                  Partnership principles for PBA. Develop overall coordination and           MoWA, TWGG, DPs  x x x xx  x  x

                  Single common M&E framework monitoring mechanism: each PBA
                                                      has a different management lead
                  and mechanism.
                                                      but can use common methods for

                  Comprehensive PBA framework coordination and monitoring.

                  by MoWA towards the new role        Strengthen DP agreement on one
                  as policy advisor to the            set of rules, procedures and
                  Government.                         requirements to support the

                                                      program and reduce MoWA's

                                                      transaction costs.

60 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
11. Mainstream gender across Thematic program goals and      Strengthen gender network with     MoWA, TWGG, DPs  x x x xx  x  x
      relevant sectoral TWGs. activities are reported on in  other TWGs and ensure that gender
                                         sectoral TWGs.      is represented and discussed in
                                                             relevant sectoral TWGs in
                                                             connection with the thematic
                                                             program goals.

                                                             Develop indicators and monitoring
                                                             system consistent with JMIs of
                                                             TWGG and other TWGs.

                          Gender and strategic needs of      Advocate with gender-responsive    MoWA, TWGG, DPs  x x x xx  x  x
                          vulnerable groups of women         donors to encourage their
                          and girls are addressed in key     colleagues and other donors to
                          sectoral plans supported by        consistently mainstream gender in
                          DPs.                               all development assistance
                                                             programs at the sectoral level.

MoWA's sustainability to perform routine duties towards implementation of PBA by implementing the Government's policies to strengthen good governance, public administration
reform, public financial management reform and aid effectiveness

12. Ensure system for     System for information             Strengthen network and media on MoWA, TWGG, DPs     x x x xx  x  x
                                                             gender equality by sector.
information               dissemination, communication
                                                             Prepare and implement electronic
dissemination,            and reporting of MoWA and          media system to manage
                                                             information and communication
communication and         stakeholders under Neary           within MoWA and line ministries.

reporting of MoWA and Ratanak IV and PBA on Gender           Coordinate dissemination of the
                                                             National Report on Women's
stakeholders under Neary Equality at national and            Progress and Gender Equality to
                                                             relevant stakeholders at sub-
Ratanak IV and PBA on sub-national levels.                   national, national and international
                                                             levels.
Gender Equality is

enhanced at national and

sub-national levels.

                                                             Coordinate with DPs to promote
                                                             gender equality at sub-national,
                                                             national and regional levels.

61 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
13. Develop PBA mechanism Guidelines of the public       Implement human resource              MoWA, TWGG, DPs  x x x xx  x  x

according to the           administrative and public     management program based on the

guidelines of the public financial management            guidelines of the public financial

administrative and public programs implemented in the    management program and

financial management PBA system.                         gradually adapt to the PBA program

programs.                                                on gender equality, especially

                                                         related to administrative processes,

                                                         management and evaluation of staff

                                                         performance.

                                                         Set up and strengthen an internal
                                                         management system for financial
                                                         management responsibility and
                                                         logistics. Coordinate with DPs
                                                         through MoUs to implement within
                                                         the PBA towards gender equality,
                                                         focusing on impacts.

14. Strengthen system for Effective system for internal  Formulation of system and             MoWA, TWGG, DPs  x x x xx  x  x
                                                         mechanism for M&E to promote
internal M&E of progress M&E of progress and operation   gender equality under the
                                                         framework of PBA.
and operation of           of mechanism to promote
                                                         Continue to strengthen internal
mechanism to promote gender equality at sub-national     audit and inspection for MoWA, and
                                                         adapt to the PBA.
gender equality at         and national levels.

sub-national and national

levels is strengthened.

62 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
PART V

FINANCIAL RESOURCES

The implementation of Neary Rattanak IV will be based mainly on financial support from the government and development
partners.

The total cost of implementation is estimated at USD 31,100,000. As gender is cross-cutting across government agenda,
this estimation does not include sectoral gender responsive programs.

Estimated costs broken down by thematic area are as follows:

Thematic Areas/Programmes              Budget Estimation  Potential Resources50
1. Economic Growth                     $4,900,000
1.1. Women's Economic Empowerment                         Government Budget and DPs including UN
                                                          WOMEN, ADB, SIDA, UNDP, JICA, Oxfam, ILO,
2. Access to Social Services and Protection               USAID, EU, WB, IFAD, IOM and others.
2.1. Education of Women and Girls, and $1,200,000
                                                          Government Budget and DPs including Action
  Behavioural Change                                      Aid, UNICEF, UNESCO, Plan International, UNDP
                                                          and others
2.2. Health, HIV and Nutrition of Women $4,100,000        Government Budget and DPs including Fred
  and Girls                                               Hollow Foundation, Global Fund, UNFPA, UN
                                                          WOMEN and others
2.3. Legal Protection for Women and Girls $5,000,000      Government Budget and DPs including GIZ,
                                                          UNFPA, UN Women, DFAT, Care International,
3. Cross-Cutting Issues                $4,300,000         PYD and others
                                       S1,200,000
3.1. Women in Public Decision-Making                      Government Budget and DPs including UNDP,
  and Politics; gender responsive                         SWISS, Oxfam, SIDA, UNFPA, UN Women
  Government Policies and Reform
  Programmes                                              Government Budget and DPs including ADB, EU,
                                                          SIDA, UNDP, SWISS, GEF and others
3.2. Gender and Climate Change, Green
  Growth and Disaster Management

4. Institutional Strengthening and     $10,400,000        Government budget and all DPs who work with
  Capacity Development toward Gender                      MoWA including UNDP, SIDA, UNFPA, UN Women,
  Equality                                                JICA, GIZ

50 In the NR4 development process, the working group has received information about the commitment of support from DPs as mentioned in each thematic
      area, however, MoWA is still seeking further support/contribution from others.

                                                                                                   NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018 63
PART VI

MONITORING AND EVALUATION

Annual Work Plan

Based on NRIV, MoWA in partnership with line Ministries/institutions and development partners will develop annual work
plans in accordance with its mandate, roles and responsibilities. This will be done through TWG-G, CNCW and other
stakeholders with the Department of Planning and Statistics as the Secretariat. The preparation and review of the annual
work plan will be done at the beginning and end of each year throughout the 5-year period based on NR4, and other
relevant policies and programmes. MoWA will play the role of facilitator in this process through annual meetings to reflect
on the results of the year and plan for the future.

Monitoring and Follow-up

Based on the indicators in this strategic plan, annual work plan and report, and in partnership with relevant Ministries/
institutions, MoWA will review the medium and long-term progress of NRIV.

MoWA, CNCW, and TWG-G will coordinate the preparation of the progress report on promotion of gender equality and
gender mainstreaming to share with line Ministries, relevant institutions at national and sub-national levels as well as
development partners. Monitoring and follow-up of the progress on implementing Neary Rattanak IV will be integrated in
the report.

Evaluation

To monitor the effectiveness and efficiency of the implementation of Neary Rattanak IV, MoWA and its partners will carry
out a mid-term evaluation and a national congress. All relevant stakeholders will participate in evaluating the achievements
and propose future directions for the remaining period.

A national congress to evaluate the overall achievements and impact of the plan will be held at the end of the five years,
with all key stakeholders. By updating the Cambodia Gender Assessment, key achievements in the different areas can be
verified and other targets will be reviewed against the national indicators related to gender equality and the empowerment
of women.

MoWA will develop a single consistent national monitoring framework, which outlines the roles of MoWA, the National
Institute of Statistics (NIS) and line ministries. Given the multi-sectoral nature of gender issues, monitoring and evaluation
will be the responsibility of all implementing institutions involved. MoWA has a coordination and oversight role, while line
ministries, NIS and other research institutions will be critical partners in data collection. Neary Rattanak IV contributes to
achieving and following up key national indicators in the NSDP as shown below.

The following set of indicators will be used to assess progress towards achieving the objectives under each thematic area.

No Indicators                        Unit    2013   2014   2015   2016  2017  2018 Data Sources

Female share of wage employment (15 to 64)      52     51     50
                                                60     55     50
1. Agriculture                       %          30     35     40  50 50 50             CSES
                                                                  50 50 50             CSES
2. Industry                          %       8,000  8,500  9,000  40 40 40             CSES

3. Services                          %

Gender and Education

4. Girls who completed               Number                       9,500 10,000 11,000  MOLVT
        long-term technical and
        vocational skills education
        and above

64 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
5. Gross enrollment rate of girls     % 27.6 27.2 28.4 31.5 35.6 41.9                    MOEYS
        in upper secondary school     % 12 13 14 16 18 20                                MOEYS

6. Gross enrollment rate of girls
        in higher education

Gender and health

7. Maternal Mortality Rate            Number         206      140  130 MAIS (MOH)
        (Per 100,000 live births)

8. Percentage of women                % 87 88 90 91 93 95 HMIS/MOH
        visiting Antenatal Care at
        least 2 times

9. Prevalence of use of modern        % 37 39 51 52 53 54 MAIS (MOH)
        contraceptive methods

Gender and violence

10. Families experiencing             Number 27,000 25,0000 23,000 20,000 18,000 15,000  CDB
        domestic violence

11. Prevalence of domestic            Number 12.8 12.8 11.5 11.5 11.5 11.5 MAIS (MOWA)
        violence

Women in decision making positions in public sector

12. Proportion of women               % 20 21 22 23 24 25 Ministry of
        holding decision making                                                                                                       Civil Service
        positions in public sector
        (from director-general to
        office level at national and
        sub-national levels)

13. Director General                  % 11 12 13 14 15 16 MAIS (MOWA)

14. Director of Department            % 12 12 14 15 16 17 MAIS (MOWA)

15. Chief of Cabinet / Director of    % 10 11 12 13 14 15 MAIS (MOWA)
        Provincial Department

16. Proportion of Women in            % 35.5              36 36.5  37 37 37              MoCS
        Public Sector

17. Proportion of women's Seat        % 14.7 14.7 14.7 14.7 30 30 MAIS (MOWA)
        in the Senate

18. Proportion of women's Seat        % 20 20 20 20 20 30 MAIS (MOWA)
        in the National Assembly

Proportion of female councilors

19. Capital/provinces                 % 10 15 15 15 15 15 MAIS (MOWA)

20. Municpality/District/Khan         % 12.68             15  15   15 15 15 MAIS (MOWA)

21. Commune/Sangkat                   % 18 18 18 18 25 25 MAIS (MOWA)

Gender and Climate Change

22. Female-headed households          Number 50,000 70,000    90,000 110,000 130,000 150,000 MAIS (MOWA)
        benefitting from Climate
        Change Program

23. Families which have access        Number 1,900,000 2,000,000 2,100,000 2,200,000 2,300,000 2,400,000 MAIS (MOWA)
        to clean water year-round

                                                                   NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018 65
                   Diagram of

       Neary Rattanak IV

       Five-Year Strategic Plan (2014-2018)

for Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment

1. Economic Growth              2. Access to Social Services    3. Cross Cutting Issues
1.1. Women's Economic              and Protection
Empowement                                                      3.1. Women in Public
                                2.1. Education of Women and     Decision-Making and
                                Girls, and Behavioral Change    Politics; Government
                                                                Policies and Programs are
                                2.2. Health, HIV and Nutrition  Gender Responsive
                                for Women and Girls
                                                                3.2. Gender and Climate
                                2.3. Legal protection for       Change, Green Growth and
                                Women and Girls                 Disaster Managerment

                       4. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity
                          Development toward Gender Equality

66 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018
Ministry of Women's Affairs of Cambodia
Trung Morn Street, Phum Dam Nak Thom III
Sangkat Steung Meanchey
Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia
Tel/Fax : (+855) 23 880 737
Email : mwa@online.com.kh
Website : www.mowa.gov.kh
Facebook : www.facebook.com/mowa.gov.kh
