               Kingdom of Cambodia
                Nation Religion King

    Financial Sector
Development Strategy

        2011­2020

  Adopted by the Council of Ministers in
the Plenary Session on 25 November 2011

  Royal GoveRnment of Cambodia
               Kingdom of Cambodia
                Nation Religion King

    Financial Sector
Development Strategy

        2011­2020

  Adopted by the Council of Ministers in
the Plenary Session on 25 November 2011

  ROYAL GOVERNMENT OF CAMBODIA
© 2012 Asian Development Bank

All rights reserved. Published 2012.
Printed in the Philippines.

ISBN 978-92-9092-688-7 (Print), 978-92-9092-689-4 (PDF)
Publication Stock No. RPT124553

Cataloging-In-Publication Data

Asian Development Bank.
      Financial sector development strategy 2011­2020.

Mandaluyong City, Philippines: Asian Development Bank, 2012.

1. Financial sector. 2. Cambodia. I. Asian Development Bank.

The views expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views and policies of
the Asian Development Bank (ADB) or its Board of Governors or the governments they represent.

ADB does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this publication and accepts no responsibility for any
consequence of their use.

By making any designation of or reference to a particular territory or geographic area, or by using the term "country"
in this document, ADB does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any territory or area.

ADB encourages printing or copying information exclusively for personal and noncommercial use with proper
acknowledgment of ADB. Users are restricted from reselling, redistributing, or creating derivative works for commercial
purposes without the express, written consent of ADB.

Note:
In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.

6 ADB Avenue, Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila, Philippines
Tel +63 2 632 4444
Fax +63 2 636 2444
www.adb.org

For orders, please contact:
Department of External Relations
Fax +63 2 636 2648
adbpub@adb.org

     Printed on recycled paper
                                                                   Chapter Title

Contents

Foreword                                                             v

Acknowledgments                                                    viii

Currency Equivalents                                                ix

Abbreviations                                                       ix

Executive Summary                                                   xi
   Major Achievements over the Past Decade                          xi
   Preparing for Challenges                                        xii
   Objectives and Strategies                                       xiii

Chapter 1: Background                                               1
   Introduction                                                     1
   Macroeconomic Management                                         1
   The Financial Sector                                             3
   Structure and Strategic Document Preparation                     4

Chapter 2: Banking Sector                                           6
   Banking System                                                   6
   Anti­Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism  13
   Microfinance Sector                                             15
   Leasing                                                         21

Chapter 3: Nonbanking Financial Sector                             24
   Insurance                                                       24
   Pensions                                                        29
   The National Social Security Fund for Civil Servants            30
   The National Fund for Veterans                                  31
   The Persons with Disability Foundation                          33
   The National Social Security Fund                               34
   Private Voluntary Pensions                                      35
   Capital Market                                                  36

Chapter 4: Governance and Infrastructure                           41
   Managing the Reform Process: Legal and Regulatory Framework     41
   Market Infrastructure: Accounting and Auditing                  43
   The Payment System                                              44
   Credit Bureau                                                   46
   Property Valuation, Estate Services, and Housing Development    46

Chapter 5: Capacity Building                                       48

                                                                                         iii
iv Contents

             Chapter 6: Action Plan for Financial Sector Development 2011­2020             51
                Banking Sector                                                             51
                Anti­Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism             62
                Microfinance                                                               63
                Leasing                                                                    70
                Insurance and Pensions                                                     71
                Capital Market                                                             80
                Governance and Infrastructure                                              86
                Property Valuation, Estate Services, and Housing Development               94
                Capacity Building                                                          96

             Appendixes                                                                    99
                1 Key Financial Data
                2 Composition of the Committee on Economic and Financial Policy,          101
                    the Steering Committee and the Technical Working Group                104
                    for Implementing the Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020
                3 ADB Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020 Team
          Chapter Title

Foreword

Over the decade to 2010, Cambodia's economy developed remarkably, with an
         average annual growth rate of 8%. Such growth was achieved by implementing
         an open market economy, based on the country's competitive advantages, and
by providing an environment conducive to private sector investment. Political and social
stability, supported by prudent fiscal and sound monetary policies, have also been
fundamental for appropriate macroeconomic management. Following adoption by the
Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC) of the Vision and Financial Sector Development
Plan 2001­2010, which was later updated to become the Financial Sector Development
Strategy (FSDS) 2006­2015, the financial sector has also contributed to high
economic growth.

In 2009, the global financial crisis began to impact Cambodia's small but open economy,
exposing several structural weaknesses that the National Strategic Development Plan
Update 2009­2013 is seeking to address. The government's timely and effective response
to the crisis lessened its impact on the economy and maintained financial system stability.
Moreover, FSDS 2006­2015 helped the banking and financial system to continue
making progress.

However, challenges remain to be addressed. To respond to these needs, and based on the
request of the Committee on Economic and Financial Policy and support from Samdech
Akka Moha Sena Padei Decho, Hun Sen, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia,
the government decided to update FSDS 2006­2015 as FSDS 2011­2020. After the
Committee on Economic and Financial Policy carefully reviewed the FSDS 2011­2020,
the Council of Ministers adopted it on 25 November 2011 as the blueprint for medium-
term financial sector development.

Updating this strategic document took into account achievements from implementing
FSDS 2006­2015 as well as lessons learned from past reforms, experiences from the global
financial crisis, and anticipation of rapid financial market development. FSDS 2011­2020
also stresses that financial sector development has to be based on principles of good
governance, which are even more important in an increasingly complex and competitive
economic and financial environment.

The financial system is now entering an era of specialization, with the emergence of
the money and securities markets, and continues to diversify in terms of institutions and
instruments. An interbank market framework has been developed, and this market is

                                                                                             v
vi Foreword

                      expected to become operational in the near future. In addition, when conditions are
                      favorable and the prerequisite infrastructure and regulatory frameworks for money
                      market development have been put in place, the RGC will issue government securities. A
                      broad-based government securities market is essential for implementing monetary policy
                      in parallel with promotion of the Cambodian riel.

                      The Cambodia Securities Exchange, the market operator for the new stock exchange, has
                      been granted a license to operate by the Securities and Exchange Commission of Cambodia
                      and has held its official launch. The insurance sector is diversifying to include life and
                      microinsurance. Banking intermediation is now conducted through m-banking, ATMs,
                      and other forms of electronic transfer. Other important financial sector developments
                      include money exchanges, trusts, leasing, pensions, pawn businesses, and collective
                      investment schemes.

                      The aim of financial sector development is a competitive, integrated, and efficient
                      financial system that is appropriately regulated and supervised to efficiently mobilize
                      savings to finance sustainable economic growth. In line with the priorities stated in the
                      National Strategic Development Plan, the financial sector should respond to market
                      needs, including those of the growing middle class and emerging microentrepreneurs in
                      hard-to-reach areas. The sector should also provide support for the critical infrastructure
                      projects required for Cambodia's rapidly growing population and for lessening
                      dependence on foreign aid. As Cambodia is now part of the Association of Southeast
                      Asian Nations (ASEAN) Economic Community, FSDS 2011­2020 takes account of the
                      proposed financial integration of Cambodia with the other ASEAN economies.

                      FSDS 2011­2020 was carefully prepared, checked, and verified under the authority of
                      the Technical Working Group and the Steering Committee for Implementing the Financial
                      Sector Development Strategy. Support was provided by the Asian Development Bank,
                      with contributions from a team of consultants from Maxwell Stamp. The Technical
                      Working Group comprises members from related key ministries and agencies, including
                      the Ministry of Economy and Finance; the Ministry of Commerce; the Ministry of Justice;
                      the Ministry of Labor and Vocational Training; the Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and
                      Youth Rehabilitation; the National Bank of Cambodia; the Council for the Development
                      of Cambodia; and the Securities and Exchange Commission of Cambodia. This Technical
                      Working Group reports to the Steering Committee, which is chaired by the Governor
                      of the National Bank of Cambodia. Experts from the banking sector, securities sector,
                      insurance sector, real estate sector, pension sector, microfinance sector, and other related
                      entities, also provided valuable inputs to the FSDS 2011­2020.

                      During the updating process, the Steering Committee and Technical Working Group
                      for Implementing the Financial Sector Development Strategy conducted research,
                      and organized workshops and meetings to finalize FSDS 2011­2020 from January to
                      August 2011. Along with this, a national workshop was organized on 19 July 2011; its
                      outcomes were reviewed by the Steering Committee at a meeting on 17 August 2011
                      and then checked and approved at the interministerial Committee on Economic and
                      Financial Policy meeting on 24 August 2011. On 25 November 2011, the Council of
                      Ministers adopted the new FSDS.
                                                                                                                    Foreword vii

We would like to express our deep gratitude to the ministries and agencies of the RGC
who have contributed to the preparation of this important strategic document. We also
wish to express our sincere thanks to the Asian Development Bank for its valuable technical
assistance and that of related parties for their efforts and contributions to developing this
FSDS 2011­2020.

Phnom Penh, 29 November 2011

             Keat Chhon                   Chea Chanto
       Deputy Prime Minister                 Governor
Minister of Economy and Finance
                                 National Bank Of Cambodia
        Book Title

      Acknowledgments

    The Government of Cambodia wishes to express sincere thanks to the Steering
                            Committee and the Technical Working Group for Implementing the Financial Sector
                            Development Strategy, as well as all the related ministries and government agencies
                     that contributed to the development of the Financial Sector Development Strategy
                     2011­2020.
                     The government would also like to specially thank the Asian Development Bank mission
                     team and its consultants for providing strategic and technical inputs in developing the
                     Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020.

viii
                                                                          Chapter Title

Currency Equivalents

(as of 22 February 2012)

                                     Currency Unit ­ riel (KR)
                                             KR1.00 = $0.000248
                                               $1.00 = KR4,021

Abbreviations

ADB     Asian Development Bank
AML     anti­money laundering
CAFIU   Cambodian Financial Intelligence Unit
CFT     countering the financing of terrorism
CIFRS   Cambodia International Financial Reporting Standards
CMA     Cambodia Microfinance Association
CPA     certified public accountant
FATF    Financial Action Task Force
FSDS    Financial Sector Development Strategy
GDP     gross domestic product
GIAC    General Insurance Association of Cambodia
IAIS    International Association of Insurance Supervisors
IAS     international accounting standards
IFAC    International Federation of Accountants
IFRS    International Financial Reporting Standards
IOSCO   International Organization of Securities Commissions
IT      information technology
KICPAA  Kampuchea Institute of Certified Public Accountants and Auditors
KR      Cambodian riel
L-MFI   licensed microfinance institution
L-MDI   licensed microfinance deposit institution
MEF     Ministry of Economy and Finance
MFI     microfinance institution
MLMUPC  Ministry of Land Management, Urban Planning and Construction
MOC     Ministry of Commerce

                                                                                         ix
x Abbreviations              Ministry of Justice
                             Ministry of Labor and Vocational Training
                      MOJ    Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation
                      MLVT   memorandum of understanding
                      MoSVY  National Accounting Council
                      MOU    National Bank of Cambodia
                      NAC    National Fund for Veterans
                      NBC    nongovernment organization
                      NFV    National Social Security Fund
                      NGO    National Social Security Fund for Civil Servants
                      NSSF   Persons with Disability Foundation
                      NSSFC  Securities and Exchange Commission of Cambodia
                      PWDF   small and medium-sized enterprises
                      SECC
                      SMEs
                   Chapter Title

Executive Summary

Cambodia's Vision and Financial Sector Development Plan 2001­2010 (Blueprint)
        focused on the development of a sound, market-oriented financial sector that will
        mobilize and allocate resources to support sustainable economic growth. In 2006,
the first Blueprint 2001­2010 was updated to become the Financial Sector Development
Strategy (FSDS) 2006­2015.

The long-term vision and strategy described in the first Blueprint and the subsequent
FSDS 2006­2015 remain broadly appropriate for the country. Overall, the Government
of Cambodia has achieved significant progress; however, some challenges still need to be
addressed. To respond to current conditions and demonstrated needs, the government
has decided to update the FSDS 2006­2015 as the FSDS 2011­2020.

The FSDS 2011­2020 reflects Cambodia's economic achievements to date and provides
an assessment of current challenges and constraints, an endorsement of the objectives in
the FSDS 2006­2015, and action plans for the future. The FSDS 2011­2020 synthesizes
and prioritizes the goals, strategies, and plans for each subsector of the financial system,
and aligns these with the long-term vision for the financial sector as a whole. It also serves
as a guide to enable development partners to coordinate the capacity building and other
forms of technical assistance that they provide.

The FSDS 2011­2020 draws on the results, lessons learned, experiences, and challenges
from implementing the previous strategies. (For details on the specific goals and action
plans of the FSDS 2011­2020, please refer to the Action Plan Matrix that begins on
page 51).

The FSDS 2011­2020 is designed to be flexible to respond to changing conditions in the
economic, social, and political situation in Cambodia; to financial industry developments;
and to the changes and challenges that result from Cambodia's increasing integration
into the regional and global markets.

Major Achievements over the Past Decade

The government has achieved a great deal over the past decade through the
implementation of many reforms. Among the most notable are

     · passage of major commercial and financial sector laws to support development of
          a sound and market-driven financial sector,

     · restructuring of the banking sector and the strengthening of key financial
          institutions,

                                                                                                xi
xii Executive Summary

                            · introduction of the financial sector infrastructure necessary to support financial
                                 market activities and improve outreach to the rural poor,

                            · development of human resources and specialized knowledge, and
                            · mobilization of the domestic financial resources needed to meet the demands of a fast-

                                 growing economy.

                       Along with past achievements, the FSDS 2011­2020 is intended to address the following
                       key challenges:

                            · emergingrisksandchallengesfromexternalshocksthatcouldjeopardizeCambodia's
                                 achievements to date,

                            · internalriskscausedbydelaysinimplementingcriticalreformsthatcouldimpact
                                 financial stability,

                            · w eak policy coordination that delays the addressing of gaps in the legal and
                                 regulatory framework, and the pace of upgrading institutional infrastructure to
                                 keep up with rapid developments in the industry,

                            · theongoingneedtoupgradefinancialsectorhumanresourcesandsustainthese
                                 improvements,

                            · theneedtoharmonizerelevantlegalandregulatoryframeworkssotheykeeppace
                                 with developments in the financial sector, and

                            · theneedforconcernedauthoritiestocollaborateinordertoavoidinterconnected
                                 risks that could damage the whole economy.

                  Preparing for Challenges

                       To prepare for any challenges that may arise during implementation, the FSDS 2011­2020
                       will require

                            · awareness,preparedness,andclosecoordinationamongallkeystakeholders;
                            · regularmonitoringofachievementsandearlyidentificationofproblemsinorder

                                 to address problems swiftly and in an appropriate manner;
                            · allocationoftheresourcesnecessarytoimplementthisstrategicplan;
                            · ownershipofthisstrategicplanbyallrelevantauthorities;
                            · c larity about who is responsible and accountable for implementing the

                                 action plans;
                            · c ooperation among international organizations and development partners that

                                 provide technical assistance and other forms of support, and oversight by the
                                 concerned authorities; and
                            · buildingasoundfoundationforongoingcapacitydevelopment.

                       Additional challenges worth emphasizing include

                            · k eepingupwithinternationalstandardsofrisk-basedsupervisionaswellasthepace
                                 of financial market development, and establishing a cooperation framework that
                                 covers all the concerned authorities;

                            · recognitionbyallconcernedthatdesigningtheinstitutionalframeworkrequired
                                 for regulating and supervising the financial sector as a whole and updating
                                 the current legal framework will take years before all has been adopted by the
                                 legislature;
                                                                                                        Executive Summary xiii

     · strengthening technical capacity in key new areas in order to keep up with the
         increasing interconnection of the banking, securities, and insurance sectors as well
         as new risks emerging that could threaten financial stability;

     · g ood technical skills and well-coordinated supervision to assess and address
         emerging market, operational, and liquidity risks;

     · d evelopingriskawarenessandthecapacitytomakegoodjudgmentsofsupervisory
         staff at all levels;

     · incentivestoretainspecializedstaffthathavebeentrainedbyvariousregulatory
         agencies so they resist growing offers of jobs in the private sector;

     · a chieving compliance with international standards in order to harmonize and
         integrate Cambodia's financial system with those of other countries in the
         Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) region;

     · e ffectively implementing of new regulations intended to improve data quality,
         transparency, corporate governance, business ethics, market disclosures, and
         achieve fair competition across the financial sector;

     · throughcooperationbetweenregulatoryauthoritiesandconcernedinstitutions,
         upgrading the existing infrastructure with a new IT system and database,
         prioritizing a corporate database in order to improve effectiveness in supervision,
         and identifying unregistered entities;

     · p romotinguseofthenationalcurrencyintheeconomyandmonitoringtherisks
         involved; and

     · e stablishing an effective cooperation framework for the authorities responsible for
         crisis management.

Objectives and Strategies

The objective of the FSDS 2011­2020 is to develop a sound financial sector that can
contribute to poverty reduction by supporting economic growth and increasing poor
people's access to finance.

Adjustments to the institutional framework need to take into account new finance
industry developments. The Law on the Issuance and Trading of Non-Governmental
Securities has established the Securities and Exchange Commission of Cambodia to act
as regulator of the securities market and market participants. Given the interconnection
between the securities market and the banking sector, to ensure effective supervision
of both, an effective cooperation mechanism needs to be established among related
financial sector authorities.

The revision of legal and cooperation frameworks. There are currently some
inconsistencies between existing laws and international standards that need to be
addressed. The problem of supervision agencies whose jurisdictions overlap in some areas
also needs to be addressed.

Crisis preparedness. A crisis management framework needs to be established and will
require periodic testing to ensure that it suits Cambodian economic and financial conditions
and addresses the new risks that may arise as a result of growing interconnections within
the financial sector. Because of the high level of dollarization, it is necessary to pay close
attention to the potential systemic risks. Establishing a financial stability unit within the
National Bank of Cambodia and an early warning system within the banking system
xiv Executive Summary

                        will help identify potential risks. In order to establish a financial stability unit and early
                        warning system, the concerned financial authorities should set up a national financial
                        stability committee.

                        In light of the government's long-term objective of promoting use of the riel and eventual
                        de-dollarization, the establishment of sound monetary policy and supporting market
                        infrastructure is imperative over the coming decade. Due to a limited range of monetary
                        policy tools, the National Bank of Cambodia must explore new tools for ensuring financial
                        stability and economic growth, build internal capacity, and gain greater autonomy in
                        designing and implementing monetary policy.

                        The banking subsector continues to dominate the financial sector and will continue to be
                        the sector's most critical segment. With regard to banking, the priorities are

                             · maintainingmonetaryandfinancialstability,
                             · addressingconstraintsinordertoacceleratesectordevelopment,and
                             · intensifying resource mobilization and enhancing the efficiency of resource

                                 allocation through development of a money market.

                        The vision for microfinance is to strengthen the sector so that it can provide the poor
                        with affordable financial services, increased income, and reduce poverty. The goal over
                        the coming decade is to further develop the sector so that it covers greater numbers of
                        low-income people.

                        For the insurance sector, the strategy is to implement the action plan specified in the first
                        Blueprint 2001­2010, develop new products, and enhance regulations and supervisory
                        capacity in line with the Insurance Core Principles of the International Association of
                        Insurance Supervisors, of which Cambodia is a member.

                        Steps to establish a securities market have progressed substantially. A stock market was
                        officially launched in July 2011, and trading began in April 2012. The Securities and
                        Exchange Commission of Cambodia will follow the core principles of the International
                        Organization of Securities Commissions. Among others, development of a successful
                        securities market will require supporting infrastructure and facilitation of access to the
                        payment system.

                        The development and operation of the payment system must be demand-led, provide
                        support, and facilitate market operators' access. Early connection with the ASEAN
                        country payment network will be necessary to achieve the goal of ASEAN financial
                        sector integration.

                        The FSDS 2011­2020 provides action plans for close cooperation of the banking sector
                        with other relevant sectors to

                             · buildcapacityforconsolidatedsupervisionandsurveillance;
                             · combatmoneylaunderingandthefinancingofterrorism;
                             · promoteleasing;and
                             · improvecorporategovernance,dataquality,accounting,andauditing,aswellas

                                 property valuation, real estate services, and the housing market.
                                                                                                        Executive Summary xv

Overall, the reform strategies and action plans for each sector stipulated in the
FSDS 2011­2020 are critical and closely interconnected. Delays in attaining the goals
for any sector will disrupt reform processes in other sectors. Based on the experience
of implementing the previous Financial Sector Development Strategy, coordination
and cooperation among competent authorities, international organizations, and
development partners are critical for ensuring reform success. Therefore, the government
emphasizes the need to regularly monitor the performance of reform programs as well as
the challenges arising from rapid financial market development, and to take timely and
appropriate actions when needed.
            Chapter Title

CHAPTER 1

Background

Introduction

Over the coming decade to 2020, diversification and modernization of the economy to
support sustainable economic growth, improve people's living standards, and reduce
poverty are priority goals of the Government of Cambodia. To support this, the Financial
Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020 (FSDS 2011­2020) is the strategic document
for continuing to develop a strong financial system and market-based principles that will
effectively mobilize and allocate the resources needed to achieve sustainable development.
This document retains the long-term vision that was set out in the Vision and Financial
Sector Development Plan for 2001­2010 and the Financial Sector Development Strategy for
2006­2015, as this vision is still appropriate for Cambodia. Over a decade of implementing
this strategy, Cambodia has achieved a great deal, but significant challenges remain.
These include rapid finance industry diversification, bringing regulations and supervision
up to international standards, establishing a mechanism to manage in times of crisis, and
assisting the financial sector to provide needed financing and financial services to the
agriculture, industry, and other real economic sectors. In preparing the FSDS 2011­2020,
the government built on the experiences and lessons learned from the Asian financial crisis
of 1997­1998 and the recent global economic crisis, and from implementing previous
strategies with regard to integrating Cambodia into the regional financial sector.

Macroeconomic Management

The FSDS 2011­2020 update takes into account three key contexts: (i) Cambodia's
economic development over more than a decade of peace, political stability, and improving
social welfare; (ii) changes in the global economy, especially since the 2008­2009 global
economic crisis; and (iii) the need for a new approach to ensure economic growth across
all sectors of the economy where the financial sector can play a crucial supportive and
integrating role.

Since the late 1990s, when peace finally came after decades of war and isolation,
Cambodia has achieved rapid economic progress. Self-confidence and pride are returning
for Cambodians nationwide, giving them a vision of a prosperous future that includes
access to decent employment and the good living standards that come from economic
development. The strategy of the government is to lead, manage, and coordinate in order
to achieve this vision, especially with regard to helping Cambodia to compete regionally
and globally.

                                                                                             1
2 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

                      In recent years, Cambodia has had one of the fastest-growing economies in the world.
                      The national economy recovered quickly from the 2008­2009 global economic turmoil
                      and has become an attractive country for investors. This economic achievement is the
                      result of rapid improvements in physical infrastructure that have taken place since the
                      general election of 1993. The government has been engaged in a broad reform program
                      in all sectors in order to achieve economic liberalization by eliminating price controls and
                      providing incentives to stimulate local as well as foreign investment in private enterprises.
                      The national economy, which was previously limited to the agriculture sector, now includes
                      thriving manufacturing and service sectors.

                      Since 1999, the government has focused its efforts on speeding up market-based private
                      sector development, and has achieved impressive results. Between 1998 and 2008,
                      Cambodia's annual gross domestic product (GDP) averaged above 9.3% due to high
                      growth in the garment, construction, and tourism sectors. Strong economic performance
                      from 2004 to 2008 coincided with the launch of the government's Rectangular Strategy
                      that stresses public financial management reform, public administrative reform, and
                      decentralization and deconcentration as three priority areas for reform. To this end, the
                      government has invested heavily in infrastructure, stressing development of the provincial
                      and rural road network. Foreign direct investment has increased substantially since 2004,
                      and especially up to the start of the global financial crisis in 2008.

                      The global economic crisis had little impact on the financial sector in Cambodia, and banks
                      in particular, but for the key economic sectors--garment manufacturing, construction,
                      and tourism--the indirect impact was more noticeable. Cambodia's economic growth
                      fell sharply in 2009 but fortunately recovered quite substantially in 2010 and 2011.
                      Also importantly, with the launch of manufacturing (primarily garments), construction,
                      and the service sector, Cambodia's economy has diversified from dependence on
                      only agriculture. Management of macroeconomic conditions through prudent
                      monetary and fiscal policies, together with financial sector reforms, have contributed
                      to Cambodia's economic achievements. For the medium term, Cambodia's annual
                      economic growth is expected to reach 6%­7%, and growth could be even higher once
                      production from Cambodia's offshore petroleum resources starts, which is expected in the
                      near future.

                      Cambodia's efforts toward regional integration have contributed to high economic growth
                      in the past decade. However, in the near future Cambodia will face stiffer competition in
                      the global market and especially with neighboring countries that are economically stronger.
                      Recent accession of Cambodia's competitors to the World Trade Organization and the
                      relatively high cost of doing business in Cambodia, especially with regard to electricity
                      and transportation, are ongoing barriers to economic development. In response to
                      these challenges, the government recently launched a policy for the promotion of paddy
                      production and rice exports, and is considering a policy to stimulate industrial development
                      and modernization of the economic structure. For Cambodia to sustain the high economic
                      growth needed to reduce poverty, focusing only on the internal market is not an option
                      for such a small economy. Thus, it must identify new international markets for its products
                      and scale up cooperation with all development partners to ensure that the country remains
                      competitive in attracting foreign investors. With these goals in mind, bringing the financial
                      system up to international standards is imperative in order to capitalize on the current and
                      potential benefits of globalization.
                                                                                                                 Background 3

For Cambodia's highly dollarized economy, fiscal policy plays a key role in controlling the
macroeconomy. From 1995 to 1998, the country experienced high inflation that reached
14.7% in 1998. This high inflation originated from external sources and high fiscal deficit.
Implementing budgetary discipline has helped Cambodia maintain low inflation and avoid
economic crises. Such discipline includes controlling government expenditures, improving
revenue collection, ceasing deficit financing from the National Bank of Cambodia (NBC),
and seeking finance only from concessional loans, primarily for needed infrastructure.
Through such policies, today the amount of the country's debt and the cost of servicing
that debt are both still low and manageable. The Public Financial Management Reform
Program that has been implemented since 2004 has been an important tool for
modernizing and improving fiscal efficiency.

The main goal of monetary policy is to maintain price stability through macroeconomic
stabilization. To this end, NBC's monetary policy stance has been to intervene in the foreign
exchange market to stabilize exchange rates and also impose the reserve requirements on
banks in order to manage the level of liquidity in the banking and financial sector as a
whole, while also promoting de-dollarization. NBC predicts an inflation rate of less than
5.0% in the short term and approximately 3.5% in the medium term. The economy is
subject to externalities as the country depends on imports of consumer products as well
as oil, and Cambodia's foreign exchange market is still underdeveloped. Under the current
monetary regime, fluctuation of exchange rates and commodity prices on the international
market has an immediate impact on domestic prices and the national economy.

The country maintains a managed floating exchange rate, which is favorable for the
accumulation of foreign reserves. With regard to de-dollarization, the NBC is not equipped
with appropriate monetary policy tools beyond its intervention in the money exchange
market and bank reserve requirements that are both prescribed by law.

In order to maintain the macroeconomic stability needed to support and sustain economic
growth, coordination of monetary and fiscal policies is required. The government will
continue to cautiously implement monetary policy in combination with budgetary discipline.

The Financial Sector

The financial sector of Cambodia has developed quickly and is highly competitive. The
value added by the sector increased an average of 22.1% per year from 2004 to 2008,
reflecting the deepening and wider scope of financial intermediation. When preparing
the Vision and Financial Sector Development Plan in 2000, the ratio of money supply to
GDP was only equal to 12.5%. This ratio rose to 20.5% in 2006, when the Financial Sector
Development Strategy 2006­2015 was updated, and it has further increased to 38.3%.
The ongoing rise in deposits and use of credit demonstrates growing public confidence
in the banking sector.

The country's banks are all privately owned and most with majority foreign shareholders.
Over the last decade, the banking sector has experienced high growth. NBC supervises
the banking system of the country. Despite progress in the banking sector, the
financial sector is still in the early stage of development as it lacks the infrastructure
to engage in all financial operations. The challenges that need to be addressed in the
FSDS 2011­2020 include the high dependence on the banking system for resource
4 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

                      mobilization, the concentration of financial assets in a few large banks that could suffer
                      from systemic risks, the high cost of bank intermediation, lack of long-term finance, lack
                      of qualified human resources, lack of managerial and supervision capacity, lack of reliable
                      credit information and related infrastructure, limited use of the national payment system,
                      the need to strengthen supervision in the nonbank financial sector, lack of a coordinating
                      mechanism and exchange of information between concerned regulatory bodies, and
                      limited financial services in rural areas.

                      Cambodia's financial sector is entering a stage of specialization with the development of
                      specialized institutions and financial instruments. The government is expected to launch
                      an interbank market and is considering issuing government securities after the necessary
                      infrastructure and regulatory framework have been put in place. This is a major condition
                      for establishing a domestic money market. A broad-based government securities market
                      would enable the authorities to conduct an open market operation. This has to be
                      implemented in parallel with promoting increased use of the riel. Cambodia's securities
                      market will commence trading after the key market players receive their business licenses.
                      The growing insurance sector provides general insurance, life insurance, compulsory vehicle
                      insurance, and microinsurance. The upgrading of the national payment system has helped
                      implement the mobile banking market and increased funds transfer through electronic
                      systems and the emergence of money exchange services. Other new developments in the
                      financial sector include the establishment of trusts, leasing operations, pension schemes,
                      pawn businesses, and collective investment schemes.

              Structure and Strategic Document Preparation

                      To prepare the FSDS 2011­2020, broad consultation took place with the line ministries
                      of the government, including the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF); NBC; Ministry
                      of Commerce (MOC); Securities and Exchange Commission of Cambodia (SECC); Ministry
                      of Justice; Council of Jurists; Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation;
                      and Ministry of Land Management, Urban Planning and Construction (MLMUPC), as
                      well as with banks and other private sector financial institutions, insurance companies,
                      securities firms, and nongovernment organizations. Key development partners such as
                      the Asian Development Bank, International Finance Corporation, International Monetary
                      Fund, and World Bank were also consulted.

                      The data for preparing this strategy were obtained from the MEF, MOC, MLMUPC, NBC,
                      and SECC as well as from other relevant institutions in the financial sector. Inputs for
                      analysis and for documenting this strategy include the study on the financial sector
                      and the discussion paper on Article IV between the government and the International
                      Monetary Fund. In addition, a number of consultative workshops were held with the
                      ministries and institutions of the government, regulators, supervisory bodies, financial
                      market participants, and development partners so they could provide their comments on
                      the draft FSDS 2011­2020.

                      This strategic document has been prepared to reflect the relationship between the
                      bank and nonbank financial sectors and the infrastructure that supports financial sector
                      development. Currently, the banking and microfinance sectors experience the highest
                      growth in the financial sector in delivering financial intermediation services to all sectors,
                      including financing to small enterprises and rural households. The development of the
                                                                                                                 Background 5

domestic money and capital markets should offer (i) new sources of financing; (ii) the
longer-term financing needed for infrastructure, manufacturing, and other forms of
industry; and (iii) financing for large enterprises. The growing nonbank financial sector is
another source of funds for promoting large-scale and effective financial intermediation.
In the long term, the initiative to develop the infrastructure necessary to support
development of the financial sector and capacity building should ensure development of
both the bank and nonbank financial sectors.

The overall strategy and a large part of the action plans for reform as prescribed in the
FSDS 2011­2020 are closely interconnected. The process and the strengthening of reform
policy require an appropriate timeline. To effectively implement the reform program, the
strategy must take into consideration challenges over the course of implementation as the
majority of reform activities necessitate preconditions that are tailored to economic and
political circumstances. On the other hand, any delay in achieving objectives in one sector
may deter the reform process in other sectors. Based on experience gained in implementing
the previous strategy for financial development, coordination and cooperation among
competent authorities, international organizations, and development partners are crucial
to reform success. Hence, the government pays close attention to the pace of the reforms
and regularly monitors their implementation and challenges that arise due to rapid market
evolution so that appropriate and timely measures can be taken.

The FSDS 2011­2020 is organized as follows: Chapter 1 provides an overview of
macroeconomic management and finance industry achievements and challenges; Chapter
2 covers the banking sector, including the banking system, measures to combat money-
laundering and the financing of terrorism, as well as to promote microfinance and leasing;
Chapter 3 covers the nonbanking financial sector including insurance, pensions, and the
capital market; Chapter 4 covers governance and the legal and regulatory framework for
financial sector infrastructure, as well as accounting and auditing, the payment system,
the system for recording collateral, and the credit bureau; Chapter 5 discusses capacity
building needs; and Chapter 6 presents the Action Plan for Financial Sector Development
2011­2020.
        Book Title

             CHAPTER 2

      Banking Sector

              Banking System

                Background

                     The National Bank of Cambodia (NBC) is the supervisory authority for banking in Cambodia,
                     and its principal mission is to formulate and implement monetary policy aimed at maintaining
                     price stability and successful economic development. NBC's main functions are to (i) act
                     as the monetary authority and implement monetary policy (NBC intervenes in the foreign
                     exchange market when deemed necessary to keep a stable exchange rate and ensure price
                     stability), (ii) act as the sole issuer of the national currency, (iii) act as the supervisory authority
                     for the banking and financial system, and (iv) oversee the payment system.

                     There were 17 banks in operation in 2003, with the number rising to 20 in 2006. At the
                     end of 2010, there were 35 licensed banks, more than double the original number in
                     2003. From very few banks after the banking system was restructured in 2003, the number
                     of bank branches rose from 35 in 2004 to 360 bank branches1 by December 2010. ATMs
                     have also started to proliferate and numbered more than 500 at the end of 2010.

                     Bank assets have grown in tandem with the increase in banking institutions, with the
                     total assets to gross domestic product (GDP) rising from about 20% at the end of 2000 to
                     about 26% in 2006, and then jumping to 53% by the end of 2010. Total deposits to GDP
                     followed a similar trend, rising from approximately 11% in 2000 to about 18% in 2006,
                     and then to about 34% at the end of 2010. While total credit to GDP was approximately
                     6% in 2000, it rose to 12% in 2006, and then to 28% at the end of 2010.

                Progress and Achievements

                     As the monetary and banking supervisory authority, NBC has actively participated in
                     maintaining financial stability through further improvement of the soundness and
                     effectiveness of the banking sector as well as development of the interbank and foreign
                     exchange markets. NBC has regularly strengthened banking regulations and supervision,
                     improved governance and transparency of the banking system, and developed
                     human capacity.

                     NBC has (i) established the infrastructure and negotiable instruments for interbank
                     operations, which are expected to be launched shortly; (ii) installed an integrated

                           1 Includes head offices.

6
                                                                                                              Banking Sector 7

accounting system at its headquarters that was rolled out to all the branches in 2011;
and (iii) issued prakas (rules and implementing regulations) to regulate the operation of
mobile phone payment systems.

An off-site supervision system was introduced, using the Cambodian Off-Site Bank
Reporting for Prompt Corrective Action. The Asian Development Bank (ADB) has been
providing technical support to help NBC upgrade the capacity of bank supervision staff
and strengthen NBC's surveillance capability.

ADB continues to support the bank's on-site supervision while the International Monetary
Fund provides a resident adviser to develop the off-site capability of NBC supervisory
officials. Arrangements have also been made with the United States Treasury Department
for long-term technical assistance for bank supervision. In December 2010, NBC also
tripled the capital requirement for banks that are owned by nonbank entities.

Human resources in the NBC Supervision Department have been increased with the
addition of 20 new staff recruited in 2010. Of this number, three have been assigned to
handle functions related to monitoring financial stability, and the rest work on banking
supervision. However, new staff will require training to bring them up to the required level
of expertise.

With NBC's support, a credit bureau was incorporated in 2011 under the joint ownership
of the Association of Banks in Cambodia, the Cambodia Microfinance Association
(CMA), and a private service provider. To facilitate access to credit for borrowers with a
good credit history, the credit bureau will serve as a repository of credit histories for all
participating financial institutions.

With the growing number and size of activities generated by registered money changers,
NBC issued a code of conduct to be followed by these entities. NBC has conducted a series
of workshops to explain the purpose of the code and the roles and obligations of each
money changer. Since then, 14 large money changers have been licensed and 25 others
have notified NBC of their wish to become licensed.

Cambodia has been active in pursuing financial cooperation in the region and has
participated in the various forums of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
and ASEAN +3.2 In July 2006, NBC became a full member of the Association of South
East Asia Central Banks.

Constraints, Challenges, and Gaps

Monetary Policy and Financial Stability. There are benefits to dollarization, such as
limited exchange rate movements that promote growth in foreign investment and
provide a stable environment for the implementation of prudent fiscal policy. However,
the loss of seigniorage and constraints on the wider use of market-based instruments in
implementing monetary policy, such as open market operations3 and foreign currency
interventions, raise serious concerns over how well a crisis would be handled, should
one occur. This is exacerbated by the limited ability of the NBC to act as the lender of

2 Association of Southeast Asian Nations plus the People's Republic of China, Japan, and the Republic of Korea.
3 When the riel becomes the dominant currency and a broad-based government securities market develops.
8 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

                      last resort and to provide emergency support to the financial system in the event of
                      a systemic problem. More important than this, the lack of close coordination among
                      ministries (particularly the Ministry of Economy and Finance [MEF]), as well as lack of a
                      clear framework to use in resolving a crisis, are critical gaps that need to be addressed.
                      The fiscal position of the government and adequate "headroom" are crucial for the
                      government to be able to lend support in the event of a crisis.

                      Insufficient supervision. Despite progress in extending the range of on-site and off-site
                      supervision, as well as coverage that includes all banks and microfinance institutions
                      (MFIs), the current level of supervision is still rule-based and requirements under the Basel
                      Core Principles are still to be fully met.

                      Resource/savings mobilization and allocation. Despite the rapid growth of the country's
                      financial sector, the level of savings mobilized has remained relatively low compared with
                      other ASEAN countries. The savings­investment gap in the country had risen from just
                      ­0.7% in 2006 to ­7% by the end of 2010. Further, analysis by the World Bank suggests a
                      high dependence on foreign savings, which cannot be assured in the current environment.
                      Over the medium to long term, the country will need to raise its level of savings from
                      domestic sources.

                      The continued lack of reliable credit information that is based on international accounting
                      and auditing standards, a system of disclosing information, and a database or centralized
                      repository of borrowers' credit histories impedes the greater flow of credit and collateral-
                      based lending (for details, please see the Credit Bureau section in Chapter 4). This has also
                      raised the risk premium that banks require.

                      These weaknesses, along with the lack of effective competition within the banking system,
                      raise the overall cost of intermediation.

                      Limited range of financial products. The financial products available have continued to
                      be limited to deposits and loans. While some nonbank financial institutions are starting to
                      emerge with more products, money changers and pawn businesses still predominate at
                      the low end of the financial sector.

                      Lack of a securities market. A securities market is still in the early stages of development
                      in Cambodia for the following reasons: (i) the lack of tradable instruments, such as
                      government securities, and a trading platform and framework; (ii) the absence of market
                      makers and a network of intermediaries; and (iii) the lack of a benchmark rate against
                      which securities could be priced when they are issued.4

                      Further, borrowers' requirements for funds may not have reached a sufficient size and
                      level to necessitate borrowing directly from the public, and the funds available in the local
                      market are still substantially retail in character.

                      No functional interbank/money market. NBC has developed the framework for operation
                      of an interbank market, including the use of negotiable certificates of deposit. However,
                      this is still to be utilized as banks currently have excess liquidity and have found no need
                      to borrow from the interbank market.

                            4 In other jurisdictions where a government securities market has not developed, alternative benchmark rates
                                have been used by the market, such as the central bank rediscount rate or the prime rate quoted by banks.
                                                                                                              Banking Sector 9

Mismatches in the duration of funds. The current loan and deposit market in the
country is basically short-term in nature, with loans usually maturing within 1 year. Some
loans are extended from 2 to 5 years, and a few for housing have terms up to 20 years,
but these are the exceptions. Such mismatches (long-term requirements financed
through short-term loans on the part of the borrower, and short-term deposits that can
be withdrawn at any time by the lender) make borrowing a considerable risk.5 It was
this mismatch between borrowers and lenders that precipitated the Asian financial crisis
in 1997.

Over the medium to long term, long-term funds must be readily available for uses such
as leasing or a strong secondary market that will allow greater scope for bridging when
borrowed funds mature.

Loan size to market need. In terms of loan size, some banks reported on their efforts to
arrange the syndication of loans for local clients with large requirements, but banks have
found it difficult to form such syndicates due to inherent lack of trust among banking
institutions, and also because banks may be unfamiliar with what is required.

Two examples of market need are not being adequately served and will continue to be
underserved, and thus constrain economic growth. These are the demand for medium-
to long-term funds and for large loans that exceed individual bank limits for single
borrowers. Such needs are likely to grow as the economy further develops and market
demand becomes more diversified and sophisticated.

Liquidity support. The principal means in the local market for providing liquidity support
to borrowers is that of providing revolving credit (i.e., renewing loans on the date of
maturity, also referred to as "evergreen loans") in the absence of a secondary market for
such funds. In this manner, banks are able to stretch the maturity of short-term loans and
borrowers are able to meet their longer-term need for financing.

Future Strategy and Plan

Implementation of monetary policy and maintenance of financial system stability.
Maintaining price and financial system stability continues to be the primary concern of
NBC to protect past achievements and foster rapid financial sector development.

Promotion of use of the riel and de-dollarization. Promotion of the riel has been
adopted as government policy over the short to medium term, and de-dollarization as
the long-term goal. However, in order to ensure investors' confidence in using the local
currency, it must be firmly anchored in credible exchange rates and stability. Despite
stability of the exchange rate and the financial system, in general, over the last decade,
limited progress has been made in using the local currency. Thus, vigorous promotion of
the riel is required.

Measures to promote use of the riel include using the riel to quote prices for goods and
services in the domestic market and for making local payments. All official disbursements
by the government must also be in riel, except for foreign currency­denominated
obligations. Over the medium term, other measures may include treating the US dollar
and the riel differently (as is the case now for reserve requirements on deposits) and

5 Studies in certain countries have shown that, on average, deposits remain with banks for about 2 years.
10 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

                        extending payment and banking services in the local currency in rural areas, where the riel
                        is usually used in favor of foreign currencies.

                        Use of the riel is said to be more prevalent in rural areas because rural people were using
                        the riel before the dollar rose to prominence. Also, use of the riel is more practical for
                        smaller transactions that predominate in rural areas because the smallest domination of
                        the US dollar is the one-dollar bill (in Cambodia, no US dollar coins are in use). People are
                        also worried about receiving fake dollar bills. If initiatives do not increase use of the riel, a
                        tax may be imposed on domestic transfers of foreign currency.

                        Investment products in riel such as treasury bills and bills of longer duration may also be
                        issued to provide an investment opportunity for Cambodians.

                        Role of banking supervision. The role of banking supervision will be further strengthened
                        through greater coordination among financial sector regulators. A joint task force
                        with representatives from each regulatory agency needs to be established to lead the
                        discussions and a joint memorandum of understanding needs to be prepared for signing
                        by concerned financial sector regulators. Common supervision approaches, including a
                        risk-based consolidated approach, will be introduced to help supervise banks and financial
                        institutions that undertake several market functions. This also highlights the crucial role
                        that banking supervision authorities and other regulators play in maintaining financial
                        system stability and preventing potential crises.

                        Compliance with the Basel Core Principles and prevailing global standards are key
                        elements for enhancing the effectiveness of banking supervision. Currently, NBC is making
                        good progress toward fully complying with the 25 Basel Core Principles. Some key areas
                        where compliance has yet to be achieved concern the following: legal protection for
                        the supervisory authority (critical for supervisory independence); moving to a risk-based
                        approach to banking supervision (in contrast with the current rule-based approach);
                        internal controls (concerning the role and function of corporate boards and management,
                        and monitoring and evaluating the internal control system); auditing; abuse of financial
                        services, such as money laundering; consolidated supervision (most banks have foreign
                        investors); and cooperation between home and host supervisors (information sharing
                        with other supervisory agencies).

                        The move to risk-based and consolidated supervision under the Basel II, in an increasingly
                        complex environment, will entail major changes in structure and the way supervision
                        is currently carried out. As explained above, the focus has shifted from rule-based
                        supervision to one that stresses governance, auditing procedures, and effectiveness of
                        risk identification and management systems. This clearly presents an improvement over
                        current supervisory processes and procedures, but the personnel who undertake these
                        new responsibilities will require new skills and qualifications; new standards for assessing
                        risk management systems; a new reporting framework; and effective data collection,
                        storage, and retrieval. The structure and organization of banking supervision will also
                        have to be continually aligned to match changing priorities.

                        The readiness of the current banking system and the legal and regulatory structure will
                        need to be carefully assessed and time lines established for compliance. Wide consultation
                        among stakeholders will also be needed in the course of carrying this out and it will be
                        essential to undertake pilot, risk-based examinations before fully applying the requirements.
                                                                                                              Banking Sector 11

For small banks, it may be too costly for them to comply with all requirements. Also, some
risks are still not found in Cambodia, notably the market risks.

Crisis prevention and resolution. Due to the absence of market signaling systems, such
as a broad-based government securities market, an early warning system and feedback
mechanisms need to be established to facilitate two-way communication between
financial institutions and NBC. It is also crucial to strengthen capacity for monitoring
financial market developments; for producing reliable, timely, and accessible data; and
for coordinating concerned regulatory agencies. Identifying market risks--including
speculative bubbles such as those in the real estate market, and in the securities market--
will require effective indicators, statistical analysis, and forecasting tools.

NBC and other financial sector agencies should have a joint crisis management framework
that includes (i) appropriate legal authorities that can act swiftly to resolve a crisis; (ii) legal
protection for the officers and staff undertaking crisis resolution functions such as taking
over bank operations, but with parallel accountability to prevent them from abusing their
authority; (iii) development of a memorandum of understanding regarding a coordination
mechanism at the highest levels that will ensure a synchronized and credible response;
(iv) a transparent action plan for taking over a problem bank or resolving a systemic
risk; and (v) identification of safety nets, where possible. All could be stipulated in the
memorandum of understanding for concerned regulatory authorities to jointly sign.

Safety nets. These may take the form of the liquidity reserves that NBC builds over time.
These nets could include liquidity pools (which are set up by the banks themselves for
extending liquidity support when banks experience liquidity problems but are still solvent)
and standby lines of credit with foreign financial institutions if urgent need arises.

In addition to these safety nets, there are special arrangements available, such as bilateral
swaps under the Chiang Mai Initiative and other initiatives of ASEAN +3. These include
the newly established $120 billion Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralization, the Asian
Bond Markets Initiative, and, more recently, the $700 million Credit Guarantee and
Investment Facility for corporate bond issuers, as well as liquidity facilities that Cambodia
could secure from multilateral institutions.

When conditions are favorable, NBC should consider establishing a deposit guarantee
institution that would (i) administer a deposit guarantee system, (ii) set service fees,
(iii) identify problem banks, (iv) pay money out to adversely affected depositors, and
(v) act as the first line of defense for the banking system in containing a run on a bank or
banks. The purpose of this institution would be to provide some stabilizing influence over
the market and to reassure small depositors, who currently predominate and are prone to
panic and could precipitate a run on the system. A deposit guarantee scheme could also
help attract more depositors,6 and especially rural people, by building greater confidence in
the system. This should, however, be balanced against creating a moral hazard for banks,
such as that of protecting weak banks. That said, barring concerns about contagion, a
deposit guarantee safety net would allow NBC to shut down a delinquent bank.

Ultimately, the development of secondary markets for assets and securities would provide
essential liquidity support to financial institutions, where asset collateral could be disposed

6 The number of depositors is still low relative to the size of the country's population (an estimated
    0.5 million people).
12 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

                        of without much loss in value and securities and loan portfolios can be securitized or
                        liquidated on short notice.

                        Cooperation and integration with ASEAN. It is clearly in Cambodia's interest to foster
                        closer cooperation with ASEAN, especially in the financial sector. Since the East Asian
                        Financial Crisis in 1997, much emphasis has been given to regional arrangements in
                        helping individual countries to prevent financial crises. Through active participation in
                        various ASEAN forums, Cambodia is preparing for eventual integration with its regional
                        neighbors and greater cross-border flows.

                        Based on the Development Action Plan, necessary reforms to achieve policy alignment and
                        coordination with ASEAN are through developing the market and legal infrastructure for
                        (i) accounting and auditing; (ii) the payment, clearing, and settlement system; (iii) stock
                        market listing and securities trading; (iv) taxation of financial instruments; (v) credit rating,
                        (vi) insolvency; (vii) secured transactions; and (viii) intellectual property. The ultimate
                        objective is to establish a single common market where ASEAN investors may invest in
                        each member country as if it were one market. However, achieving integration in various
                        areas requires specialized expertise and in-depth treatment, especially where the region
                        is concerned.

                        Implementation of an interbank market. While demand for using the interbank market
                        is limited as banks have excess liquidity, there is clear need to start an interbank market
                        because of the difficulties that banks have in covering their reserve positions and also in
                        seeking temporary investments for their excess funds. To fulfill the need for such securities,
                        NBC expects to introduce negotiable certificates of deposit shortly.

                        Nonetheless, before an active market can emerge, all banks will have to be confident
                        that the interbank market can provide reliable backup liquidity to bridge their short-term
                        liquidity needs. This will allow them to eventually lessen their reliance on retained deposits
                        to meet their temporary liquidity needs.

                        Development of a money market. To facilitate money market development as Cambodia
                        plans, the relevant authorities need to set up the legal and regulatory framework to
                        allow specialized nonbank financial institutions the right to issue and use various trading
                        instruments in the market. Once documentary credits become more prevalent in the
                        market, this means being able to issue and use various negotiable instruments such
                        as commercial papers and negotiable promissory notes, including bills of exchange.
                        Repurchase agreements that cover these underlying instruments have already been
                        addressed. Limits on how much can be issued to the public by securities firms or financial
                        institutions themselves will have to be established and monitored. In some jurisdictions,
                        part of the issue may require a bank guarantee (say 10% of the issue). This provides some
                        protection for investors, as it provides a partial guarantee in case of loss and ensures
                        that the issue will be reviewed by a bank before it is issued to the market. As the market
                        broadens and deepens, more market players will participate so long as profits can be
                        made. However, the market will likely develop at its own pace. The government may
                        consider offering incentives to attract market players, especially foreign institutions that
                        could help introduce the required technology. Once a broad and deep market for securities
                        develops over time, financial institutions should find it attractive to securitize their
                        loan portfolios.
                                                                                                              Banking Sector 13

For borrowers who require large loans that exceed what any individual bank can provide
owing to their single-borrower limits, the sale of securities directly to investors would
allow borrowers to raise the amount of capital they require. Moreover, such requirements
could be syndicated, either on a private placement basis (held by the underwriting
syndicate itself and not sold publicly) or through a publicly underwritten issue (sold and
distributed to various investors). However, a suitable framework for syndicating loans and
issuing securities needs to be established that defines the legal rights and obligations of
each participant in a syndication, the terms and conditions of the loan or security to be
issued, the yield on the security or offering price, the related fees, how modifications are
to be handled, and the procedures to be followed in case of a lawsuit (including who will
act as the paying and collecting agent, who will be the legal counsel for the syndicated
loan, etc.). This is necessary, as some attempts at syndication have been made but did not
succeed since banks are not accustomed to cooperating with each other.

For a capital market in debt instruments to develop (bonds and long-term commercial
papers, for example), the money market must be developed first. This is because the
money market serves as the secondary market where debt instruments of long duration
can be sold, liquidated, and transformed into cash in the same way that a stock exchange
provides secondary market support for equity instruments.

Anti­Money Laundering and
Combating the Financing of Terrorism

Background

As a member of the Asia Pacific Group on Money Laundering, Cambodia is committed to
complying with international standards, and especially relevant international conventions,
United Nations Security Council resolutions, and Financial Action Task Force (FATF)7
recommendations.

Progress and Achievements

Since Cambodia first underwent a mutual evaluation in February 2007, when no anti­
money laundering (AML) and countering the financing of terrorism (CFT) regime existed,
it has made great strides in meeting the FATF 40+9 recommendations.

The Law on Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism was
passed in 2007 and a prakas (rules and implementing regulations) was issued to define its
structure, role, and functions.

Subsequently, the prakas on AML/CFT was issued for banking institutions and for all
other reporting entities not regulated by NBC. The prakas requires all reporting entities
to report on a regular basis and requires banks and financial institutions to establish

7 The FATF currently has 36 members: 34 jurisdictions and 2 regional organizations (the Gulf Cooperation
    Council and the European Commission). Also, 27 international and regional organizations are associate
    members or observers of the FATF and participate in its work.
14 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

                        internal control systems for AML/CFT procedures that are fully in accord with the law.
                        A prakas on AML/CFT to cover reporting entities not regulated by NBC was issued on
                        21 December 2010.

                        The Cambodian Financial Intelligence Unit (CAFIU) was established within NBC in 2008.
                        Since its establishment, a number of prakas have been passed to support the operations of
                        the CAFIU. Aside from the Law on Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the Financing
                        of Terrorism, a number of other laws have been approved, such as the Counter-Terrorism
                        Law that criminalizes the financing and provision of material support for terrorist acts, the
                        Criminal Procedure Code, the Criminal Law, and the Anti-Corruption Law. The Law on Drug
                        Control criminalized money laundering related to narcotics trafficking as early as 1996.

                        The CAFIU has been working with the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of the Interior, and
                        other relevant ministries in taking coordinated action. For the provision of information
                        regarding AML/CFT, it has reached an arrangement with the national police under the
                        Ministry of the Interior.

                        The CAFIU has also been gradually developing its capabilities. The United States Treasury
                        Department, in cooperation with the Ministry of the Interior, conducted two training
                        courses on financial investigative techniques under the AML/CFT framework in June and
                        September 2008. Bank Negara Malaysia has also conducted three workshops at separate
                        times to develop a strategy to implement a national program and enable financial sector
                        participants to understand their obligation to report suspicious transactions to the CAFIU
                        and undertake AML/CFT supervision of banking and financial institutions.

                        Memorandums of understanding on information exchange have been signed with Bank
                        Negara Malaysia, Bangladesh Bank, and the Central Bank of Sri Lanka.

                        Cambodia has also gained membership in the Asia Pacific Group on Money Laundering
                        and has committed to comply with international standards such as relevant international
                        conventions, United Nations Security Council resolutions, and FATF recommendations.

                        The UN Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate also visited Cambodia and
                        commended the government for significant progress in developing its CFT regime.

                  Constraints, Challenges, and Gaps

                        While progress in complying with international commitments is being made, Cambodia
                        still has to fully meet its commitments under international agreements and strengthen
                        adjudication and intermediary functions.

                        Based on the Asia Pacific Group on Money Laundering Annual Meeting 2010, the
                        mutual evaluation progress report shows that Cambodia was still rated as noncompliant
                        on all six core recommendations, partially compliant on three key recommendations,
                        noncompliant on seven of these key recommendations, only partially compliant on
                        10 more recommendations, and noncompliant on 20 others.

                        The CAFIU is understaffed.
                                                                                                              Banking Sector 15

Future Strategy and Plan

A mutual evaluation progress report was prepared by CAFIU for 2011. Except for a few
areas, CAFIU has achieved compliance with most FATF recommendations, however, the
actual review still has to take place. Notably, the few areas of non-compliance were
development of a national risk assessment framework and completion of a strategic
implementation plan, development of the legal framework to adequately criminalize
money laundering and terrorist financing, establishment of adequate procedures for
the confiscation of funds and assets related to money laundering, and enhancement of
cooperation among Cambodian authorities and with international supervisors.

CAFIU has to be properly staffed and strengthen its staff capabilities.

CAFIU has to strengthen coordination with the MEF, NBC, the Ministry of Interior, the
Ministry of Justice, and other supervisory authorities.

CAFIU has to extend coverage of inspection to cover all reporting entities and strengthen
regional and international cooperation.

Microfinance Sector

Background

Importance of the microfinance sector. The government has recognized the important
role that microfinance plays in socioeconomic development, particularly in the area of
poverty reduction. As of 2001, Cambodia was one of more than 30 countries8 that had
developed a national microfinance strategy.9 Among these countries, the Cambodian
microfinance sector has developed quickly and has been internationally recognized due to
an enabling regulatory and supervisory framework that governs microfinance providers.
Recently, the number of MFIs has grown and they have expanded their activities to include
deposit-taking so they can better serve low-income people.10

Evolution of the microfinance sector.11 Cambodia's formal microfinance sector emerged
from a number of microcredit projects initiated by international donors, nongovernment
organizations (NGOs), and other institutions in the early 1990s.12 By the end of 2011,
the 56 MFIs under the supervision of NBC had become an integral part of the formal
financial sector.

Composition of the microfinance sector. The sector is composed of two important
groups of institutions: (i) formal MFIs that are either licensed MFIs or registered MFIs and
(ii) an estimated 60 NGO microfinance providers that are unregistered with NBC.

8 E. Duflos and J. Glisovic-Mezieres. 2008. Brief: National Microfinance Strategies. Washington, DC: Consultative
    Group to Assist the Poor.

9 This strategy is included in the Financial Sector Blueprint for 2001­2010 and its updated version called
    Financial Sector Development Strategy 2006­2015.

10 International Finance Corporation. 2009. Microfinance in Cambodia: Taking the Sector to the Next Level.
     Business Issues Bulletin. No. 17.

11 The sector development is described in Cambodia Microfinance Association. 2009 Annual Report. pp. 5­6.
12 Pioneers were GRET (1991), World Relief (1992), and the Association of Cambodian Local Economic

     Development Agencies (ACLEDA) and Catholic Relief Services (1993).
16 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

                        Favorable factors. Key factors that have contributed to rapid growth of the sector over
                        the last decade include (i) strong demand for credit; (ii) opportunity to provide rural
                        financial services; (iii) strong support from development partners; (iv) commitment of
                        the government, as evidenced by the adoption of a National Microfinance Strategy; and
                        (v) highly committed and capable managers and staff at MFIs.

                        Recent evolutions. The global financial crisis of 2008­2009 indirectly affected all sectors
                        of Cambodia's economy, and the microfinance sector was no exception. Client over-
                        indebtedness has become a problem in recent years due to competing MFIs offering
                        loans, clients' low level of financial literacy, and the lack of a credit information sharing
                        system to alert an MFI when a prospective borrower has other loans.

                        Pawn businesses. Pawn businesses play an important role in meeting poor peoples'
                        urgent need for cash. To legalize this subsector, the MEF issued prakas No. 028 SHV.
                        PrK, dated 12 January 2010, on Licensing of a Pawn Business and Buying and Selling of
                        Pawned Pledges, and Transfer of Title. It has also enabled the government to issue licenses
                        to 73 companies and pawn businesses so they could legitimately conduct business.

                        Key issues. The financial sector has faced many challenges over the last decade, many
                        of which have been successfully addressed. However, other challenges remain, which
                        include finding effective ways of transforming traditional credit and savings institutions
                        so they can adapt to the needs of the citizen and are more financially inclusive. This
                        transformation should be accompanied by strengthened regulatory and supervisory
                        capacity and a greater focus on the balance between financial returns and social
                        responsibility as well as consumer protection through transparency regarding fees and
                        interest rates.

                  Progress and Achievements

                        Much has been accomplished by the microfinance sector through complying with the
                        vision for the Financial Sector Blueprint 2001­2010. As of December 2011, there were
                        56 MFIs, of which 28 were licensed and 28 were registered, compared with only 30 MFIs
                        in 2002. Also, NBC has issued licenses to seven MFIs that are fully qualified to take
                        public deposits.

                        The government has organized a forum for policy coordination and through the
                        Rural Development Bank is offering loans to support the agriculture sector and its
                        subsectors. This policy has also encouraged MFIs to lend to larger micro-, small, and
                        medium-sized enterprises.

                  Constraints, Challenges, and Gaps

                        Constraints, challenges, and gaps for development of the sector include (i) strengthening
                        the regulatory and supervisory framework and capacity, (ii) expanding services,
                        (iii) improving outreach, (iv) increasing consumer protection, (v) enhancing operational
                        efficiency and the quality of service providers, and (vi) strengthening sector support.

                        Strengthening the regulatory and supervisory framework and capacity. While the
                        current framework for microfinance has strongly supported development of the sector,
                        there is still a need to address gaps, including building the capacity of regulators
                                                                                                              Banking Sector 17

and supervisors to oversee MFIs, including licensed and deposit-taking financial
institutions. The government will further focus on the implementation of international
standards for microfinance regulation, supervision, and the licensing criteria for
deposit-taking MFIs, and requiring that MFIs meet the same reporting standards as
banks. However, with regard to the latter, the cost and benefit for MFIs will have to
be considered.

Expanding services. To reach a larger segment of the population as well as to expand
the scope of savings mobilization and the provision of credit, MFIs cannot rely solely on
deposit and credit. With their national reach and expertise, MFIs have the capacity to
reach the unbanked and underbanked with a broad range of financial services, in addition
to deposit and credit.

Improving outreach. There is a need to better understand how to extend access to financial
services to people, especially poor people in hard-to-reach areas where opportunities
may be scarce and who may have limited knowledge of how to access available
financial services. Financial literacy should be a critical component of expansion into
hard-to-reach areas.

Microfinance services are used by the poor, including low-income earners, people with
disabilities, and people living in remote areas. The international standard for measuring
the ability to offer microfinance services is 20% of the average credit ratio to GDP.
For Cambodia, this ratio is 54%, as the average loan is $430 and GDP per capita is $795.
These data may suggest that either the poor make little use of microfinance services or
that borrowers are overburdened by their debts.

Because MFIs are not able to reach all rural and remote areas, borrowers must rely mainly
on informal sources of finance at substantially higher interest rates, estimated to be as
high as 10.0% per month compared with the 1.8%­3.0% per month rates charged by
formal MFIs (depending upon the maturity and the risk in lending). There are a number of
reasons cited for the low level of rural penetration by MFIs: (i) remote locations are difficult
to reach, (ii) hard-to-reach areas pose greater security problems for MFIs, (iii) roads are
poor in some areas, (iv) economic activity is limited, (v) income-generating activities and
vocational training are lacking, (vi) financial literacy and knowledge of how to start or
manage a business is lacking, (vii) formal loans are unavailable, and (viii) credit risks are
high. These constraints all contribute to a low level of financial inclusion in hard-to-reach
rural areas.

Pawn businesses support the expansion of micro lending and face similar challenges as
MFIs. Based on variability in size, and the small-scale transactions involved, this sub-sector
has been challenging for regulators to supervise. As mentioned above, MEF has been
drafting a Law on the Licensing of a Pawn Business and Buying and Selling of Pawned
Pledges, and Transfer of Title, as well as other relevant provisions. MEF is also creating
other supporting mechanisms to officially promote the development of this sub-sector
and its effective management.

Operationally, MFIs need credit information, payment services, and other financial services
and to strengthen their management information systems with accounting and loan
tracking capabilities. The quality of reporting by MFIs will need to match the reporting
quality of commercial banks. In terms of client capacity, there is a need to strengthen the
18 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

                        training infrastructure for micro-entrepreneurs, including support for facilities and venues
                        for training, development of curriculum and materials, and development of trainers.

                        Increasing consumer protection. There is still a lack of MFI consumer protection, of
                        guidelines for resolving disputes between clients and MFIs, and of basic norms for debt
                        collection. In general, MFI borrowers and staff lack financial literacy. The establishment
                        of a credit bureau to service the entire financial sector, including microfinance, has been
                        achieved. On top of that, for consumer protection, improving transparency in revealing
                        the true cost of financing and improving the professional ethics of MFI staff are critical.

                        Enhancing operational efficiency and the soundness of service providers. Currently, MFIs
                        in Cambodia have different management information systems that make supervision by
                        regulators time-consuming and expensive. A recent study revealed that there is a need to
                        standardize management information systems, which means additional spending for some
                        MFIs. This problem requires further study to explore appropriate solutions.

                        Strengthening industry support. Currently, there are four institutions that offer training
                        courses on microfinance in Cambodia--the Cambodia Institute of Banking under the
                        auspices of the Association of Banks in Cambodia, the CMA, the Center for Banking
                        Studies of the NBC, and the ACLEDA-ASEAN Regional Microfinance Training Center. To
                        respond to needs and comply with the rules and regulations in this sector, there is a need
                        to assess the quality of these training facilities.

                        Strengthening the CMA is a priority to enhance the role of this entity in policy coordination,
                        dialogue between the government and microfinance providers, and research and exchange
                        of information within the sector.

                  Future Strategy and Plan

                        The vision for microfinance from 2006­2015 is to develop a strong and effective
                        microfinance system and serve the interests of the poor by providing affordable financial
                        services, increasing income, and alleviating poverty. The vision for the sector remains
                        appropriate for the FSDS 2011­2020 and is based on the guidelines to achieve the
                        objectives of the National Microfinance Strategy.

                        MFI supervision. To strengthen NBC's present supervision methodologies, NBC assesses
                        MFI compliance with the requirements of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
                        and the Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision.

                        These efforts are to be conducted on a continuous basis following best practices suited to
                        the rapidly changing nature of Cambodian MFI operations. The objective is to be able to
                        conduct on-site supervision for all MFIs once every 12 to 24 months.

                        Common reporting standards. NBC will consider putting in place common reporting
                        standards when the reporting standards of MFIs have been improved and aligned with
                        the financial reporting standards of banks, but taking into account the costs and benefits
                        of having such a system for all MFIs.

                        Regulatory improvement to support product diversification. The government will
                        further improve rules and regulations to support the expansion of MFI services and
                                                                                                              Banking Sector 19

products, including giving permission to licensed deposit-taking MFIs to become members
of NBC's clearinghouse and encouraging MFIs to create innovative new services. So far,
MFIs in Cambodia primarily offer credit and, to some extent, savings. Other possible
activities that MFIs could engage in include microinsurance; microleasing; servicing of
payments and remittances;13 and providing small- and medium-sized enterprises with
financing, educational loans, and housing finance. Mobile banking service is another area
for possible MFI expansion once necessary rules, regulations, and supervision are in place.
Mobile banking would allow both internal and international transfers and could promote
use of the riel.14

Access to credit information. With approval by NBC, Credit Bureau Cambodia has
commenced operation. Access to the credit bureau by MFIs offers several advantages:
easier access to credit for creditworthy borrowers, speeding up loan processing and
approvals, facilitating the setting of interest rates according to risk levels, setting interest
rates based on clients' past history of borrowing, and reducing the costs of borrowing by
reducing losses that are due to fraudulent applications and high processing costs.

Establishment of a mechanism for redressing the grievances of microfinance clients will
provide a higher level of protection for clients. All relevant government agencies are
collaborating with CMA to identify a strategy and agency to implement this mechanism.

Market transparency and disclosures. To protect the interests of the people, the
government will put in place the following measures:

     · designandimplementaprogramforpromotingfinancialliteracyfortheclientsof
         MFIs and the general public;

     · introduceandimplementguidelinesforconsumerprotectionbasedonexperience
         and best practices; and

     · c onductastudyonover-indebtednesstodeterminetheextentofborrowerswith
         more than one loan.

Cost efficiency. The government will continue to target improving MFI efficiency in order
to reduce the cost of borrowing from these institutions by encouraging an expansion of
savings mobilization, as well as improvements in MFI management information systems,
branchless banking, and wider use of the credit bureau.

The government will consider other funding options, such as (i) providing an untied
guarantee facility to banks to lend to qualified, creditworthy MFIs and borrowers in
preferred industries; (ii) giving permission to banks to use an appropriate level of MFI
securities as reserve requirements in order to encourage banks to lend to MFIs in riel;
(iii) continuing to provide wholesale funds in collaboration with other fund providers,
including banks, for on-lending to MFIs; (iv) considering a comprehensive approach
such as setting up a development finance institution that can play the role of mobilizing
and providing wholesale funds to MFIs; and (v) implementing the Microfinance Risk
Participation Program that ADB approved. This credit facility has $250 million and financial
institutions that participate in the credit facility can be guaranteed up to 50% repayment
if an MFI defaults.

13 These financial products are dealt with in other sections of this report.
14 Meliza H. Agabin. 2007. Technical Innovation for Expanding Outreach: Mobile Phone Banking in the

     Philippines. Presented at the Third African Microfinance Conference, Kampala, Uganda, 20­24 August.
20 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

                        Enhancement of microfinance institutions' management information systems.
                        The objective is to introduce a management information system that is capable of
                        providing the information required by supervisory authorities and at the same time serves
                        effective and efficient management of MFI operations. The cost of this system should be
                        affordable to small MFIs.

                        Support for and enhancement of the role of CMA. The MEF and NBC, in cooperation
                        with concerned stakeholders, will provide support to CMA in developing necessary training
                        modules and the implementation of CMA's business plan to help improve its capacity.
                        CMA is expected to play a more active role in helping develop and disseminate policy, and
                        improve dialogue with government and within the industry, and advocacy, research, and
                        information exchange with the government and other stakeholders. In terms of CMA's
                        own development, efforts should be made to continually strengthen capacity through
                        improving governance, operations, financial viability, human resources, communications,
                        and service delivery.15

                        Promotion of savings mobilization. The government continues to promote using MFIs
                        for mobilizing savings in rural areas to enable MFIs to finance their lending with the lower-
                        cost financing provided through savings.

                        NBC is preparing a prakas on credit cooperatives or financial communities. This would
                        pool various initiatives aimed at licensed and registered MFIs. At the moment, some NGOs
                        are acting as financial cooperatives and are mobilizing savings, but have not registered
                        with NBC.

                        Study and development of capacity for competition. The government will promote and
                        improve statistical analysis and define markets by geographical area and sector. This will
                        identify alternative financing sources that include moneylenders, families, friends, village
                        banks, communities, etc.

                        Expansion of access to credit. The government will develop a coordinating mechanism
                        between MFIs and pro-poor organizations in order to develop methods and appropriate
                        programs to assist the poor to access MFI services.

                        To contribute to the provision of microfinance for the poor, the government will develop
                        a regulatory and supervisory framework as well as a management mechanism in order
                        to develop a formal pawn business sector and provide effective supervision. Also, the
                        government will promote professionalism in pawn businesses through the use of information
                        technology for regulators, operators, and relevant competent authorities.

                        In the medium term, CMA should support research on product innovation, including
                        the development of specialized products and services and training that could help in
                        connecting the extremely poor with income-generating opportunities. Following this
                        research, replication of successful pilots on how to penetrate hard-to-reach areas should
                        be considered.

                        Provision of client training. Clients of MFIs need help to develop financial literacy, improve
                        their production and understand their market. The government will develop a sound policy

                              15 See the SEEP Network's Network Capacity Assessment Tool. http://networks.seepnetwork.org/en/node/1256
                                                                                                              Banking Sector 21

to motivate NGOs to offer reasonably-priced business development services, and MFIs to
offer financial literacy training.

Leasing

Background

Leasing is quite widespread and popular in Cambodia. However, many people do not
understand the terminology used in the leasing industry.16 They do not understand what
a lease is, the benefits of leasing, or the distinction between a lease and a rental.

Even without a clear legal framework, the supplier-oriented leasing market has expanded.
Several companies are leasing vehicles to firms in the extraction industry. Several taxi
companies use leased vehicles, and there are leased biofuel generation facilities.

Current leases include 50- to 99-year leases to companies that need land to build a factory;
the lease of office space for 5 years, with the option to renew; the lease of manufacturing
equipment for 5 years, with the lessee having the option to purchase the equipment at
the end of the term; the lease of construction equipment, with billing based on running
hours; the lease of a vehicle by the day; the "lease" of temporary staff in which the supplier
of the staff handles all payroll matters; and the lease of a copy machine, in which the
lessor supplies all toner, paper, and maintenance, with the charge based on the number of
pages copied.

Progress and Achievements

The Law on Secured Transactions was passed in 2007. The Law on Financial Leasing was
enacted in 2009. The Civil law has been enacted and became effective in 2011.

Constraints, Challenges, and Gaps

Leasing operations have not been fully standardized. The Law on Banking and Financial
Institutions identifies leasing as a banking operation, but as leasing is not limited to
banks, NBC needs to clarify what types of leases are restricted to banks or organizations
licensed by it.

A critical advantage of leasing is the lessor's ability to quickly take back the asset if the
client is in default. Existing laws specify different rights for the lessor: for example, the Civil
Code and the Law on Secured Transactions require a court order to repossess equipment,
which can delay repossession and even lead to damage of the asset or reduce its value.
The Law on Financial Leasing gives the lessor the right to repossess and voids other
provisions that state otherwise. The Law on Secured Transactions declares that almost all
leases are secured transactions. In the case of contradiction between provisions of this law
and those of other laws, the Law on Secured Transactions is considered the final authority,
except in cases where other laws make specific reference or amendments that contradict

16 The supplier is the seller of the asset, also referred to as the vendor. The lessor is the landlord or owner of the
     asset. The lessee is the user of the asset.
22 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

                        it. Any provisions that are not specified under this law must comply with the Civil Code of
                        the Kingdom of Cambodia.

                        The Law on Financial Leasing states that the lessee has the right to select the equipment
                        and its vendor. However, some interpret this to mean that a lessor has no right to qualify
                        the vendors, review the acquisition price for the equipment, or validate the resale market
                        for the equipment.

                        The Civil Code requires that the lessor maintain the equipment, which is an area where
                        banks have no expertise. The code is silent on the responsibilities of the vendor and the
                        lessee, but the vendor usually supplies spare parts, provides a warranty, and performs
                        maintenance and repairs.

                        In many countries, hire-purchase contracts are installment sales contracts. The General
                        Department of Taxation views these as sale-financing instruments for vendors. NBC
                        considers a hire-purchase contract as a form of lease.

                        The tax treatments for bank loans and equipment leases are not the same, particularly in
                        the area of value-added tax (VAT) and withholding tax. A bank loan is exempt from VAT
                        and withholding tax, yet a lease requires 10% VAT to be added and a 10% withholding
                        tax to be paid by the lessee on behalf of the lessor.

                        The current application of VAT is not consistent. VAT is to be paid for new imported
                        equipment and passed on to users by collecting VAT on the rental cost of equipment
                        leases, but it is not customary to collect VAT on the lease payments for car rentals or
                        office space.

                        Withholding tax is another unclear issue. Technically, withholding tax is the prepayment
                        of the lessor's tax on profits. The withholding tax is 10% of the lease payment. The lessee
                        is required to file a tax return and pay 10% withholding tax to the General Department of
                        Taxation. This practice leads to duplication of taxation.

                        International firms that conduct business in developing countries often lease rather
                        than buy their office equipment. Due to tax policy and budget constraints, these firms
                        are forced to lease used equipment, which is less durable, and the spare parts are not
                        readily available.

                        A draft prakas on tax on financial leasing proposes a single amortization table for
                        each lease transaction, disclosing the cost and gross profit. It is impossible to use only
                        one amortization table for each lease covering both the lessee and lessor. The General
                        Department of Taxation should prepare a prakas on leasing taxation to help clarify the
                        meaning of revenue, expense, depreciation, tax on profits, VAT, and withholding tax.

                        A legal requirement for anyone taking a security interest in a movable asset is the need
                        to make the lien public. This is to protect the lender or lessor from the lessee secretly
                        selling the equipment. This also protects buyers who would not know that they are
                        buying leased equipment and that it could be repossessed. The Ministry of Commerce
                        has developed a world-class registry for secured transactions, but has not developed one
                        for leases.
                                                                                                              Banking Sector 23

The government tends to protect consumers through full disclosure of the effective
interest rate on loans. Leasing may be conceptually similar but the effective cost of a lease
is calculated differently by the lessor and the lessee.

The government has lost much tax revenue from informal leasing. Informal leasing has
also created unfair competition for formal leasing companies. Therefore, the government
is working to move more of the informal businesses into the formal sector.

The government is rebuilding infrastructure, and some requirements have not yet been
put in place. For example, while the Ministry of Commerce has developed a secured
transaction registry, the Ministry of Land Management, Urban Planning and Construction
has not started to develop the registry to handle fixtures.17

Future Strategy and Plan

To avoid conflict in regulations, NBC will amend the Law on Banking and Financial
Institutions to clarify leasing for banks, license leasing companies, and supervise leasing
and leasing companies. The NBC is responsible for licensing leasing businesses. At the
same time, the government should make it clear which ministry will license and regulate
operating lease businesses.

The government will review the Civil Code, the Law on Secured Transactions, and the
Law on Financial Leasing in order to clarify the vague and conflicting provisions that
could lead to confusion in the implementation of leasing. It will also align leasing
requirements with international accounting standards and practices.

The government will consider developing tax policy on leasing in order to promote the
development of the sector. The General Department of Taxation will prepare guidelines
for implementing the tax obligations of the sector covering the specific obligations with
regard to VAT and withholding tax.

The development of infrastructure necessary to support leasing shall be accompanied by
a specific plan of action.

The government will encourage lessors who are large suppliers to take part in
leasing to support the development of some industries, such as construction and
mineral exploration.

The government will further protect consumers by requiring lessors to disclose
information on leasing to lessees. The disclosure shall comply with accepted accounting
principles and financial reporting.

17 A fixture is a movable asset that is attached to an immovable asset (land and buildings).
        Book Title

             CHAPTER 3

      Nonbanking Financial Sector

              Insurance

                Background

                     The Law on Insurance was promulgated in 2000. The Sub-decree on Insurance was
                     adopted in 2001, and a number of regulations were introduced to develop the insurance
                     sector. The strategy for this sector's development was also specified under the Vision and
                     Financial Sector Blueprint 2001­2010.

                     With the promulgation of the law and regulations mentioned above, many businesses
                     that previously used foreign insurance services now use domestic insurance services
                     instead. Total premiums in 2010 were $24.8 million, an increase of 24% relative to 2009.
                     However, this amount only represents 0.2% of GDP. Total assets of the insurance industry
                     in 2010 were $77.2 million, or 0.7% of GDP. Compared with regional and world markets,
                     the insurance market in Cambodia is still small.

                     The insurance market in Cambodia is limited to a few types of insurance products, and
                     as of 2010 only six insurance companies, plus one reinsurance company, were licensed to
                     operate in Cambodia. At the end of 2010, the total assets of the industry accounted for
                     only 1.2% of the total assets of the financial sector.

                     With the intention of speeding up development of Cambodia's insurance industry,
                     the government helped expand the insurance market by introducing life insurance
                     services in 2011, which is another new phase of development for the sector, and in
                     turn enhances the role and the importance of the insurance industry. The capital and
                     reserve requirements for life insurance businesses are major sources for investment in the
                     financial market.

                     The government provided the enabling environment for offering microinsurance services
                     to low-income people in rural areas. This should also help expand the scope of the
                     insurance market in Cambodia.

                     Despite the global financial turmoil that has threatened Cambodia's financial industry,
                     the insurance sector has remained strong. After prudential regulations were issued by the
                     regulator, the industry has remained stable and is maintaining its development agenda.

24
                                                                                             Nonbanking Financial Sector 25

Cambodia's regulator is an active member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) insurance regulator group. Regular meetings and communications within this
framework have proven to be very beneficial to the regulator's development program.

The General Insurance Association of Cambodia (GIAC) was formed in 2005 to represent all
general insurance companies who are conducting business in Cambodia. This association
has been active and works in close partnership with the regulator for the successful
development of Cambodia's insurance sector. The association has set the tariffs for fire
and motor vehicle insurance, which is the beginning of self-regulation. GIAC is working
with the Malaysian Insurance Institute to organize training courses to develop the capacity
of insurance industry staff.

Progress and Achievements

The issuance of insurance-related regulations in 2007 was an important contribution to
the development of the insurance sector. The insurance regulator has published annual
reports on insurance market development in Cambodia to provide information about
the market and updates on regulations. Moreover, a prakas on public disclosure of the
annual financial reports of insurance companies has also been issued to ensure greater
transparency in the market.

Starting from 2007, the insurance regulator has organized a capacity-building program
to enhance the capacity of officials in the insurance regulating body, focusing primarily
on general insurance.

The Cambodia insurance regulator became a member of the International Association of
Insurance Supervisors (IAIS) in 2009. As a member, the insurance regulator can access the
new online resources of the association and the advice of prominent experts in addressing
challenges in the insurance sector.

The regulators' staff commenced off-site and on-site supervision processes in 2007 and
the quality of these processes has been gradually improved with technical assistance
provided by ADB.

The government has prepared a new law on insurance to replace the existing one. The
new draft law intends to improve the legal framework so it can respond to the rapid pace
of development in the insurance market and ensure its smooth integration into the region
and the world. The new law is expected to be promulgated in the near future.

The regulator has made efforts to finalize the sub-decree on microinsurance for managing
the microinsurance business in Cambodia. At the same time, the insurance regulator has
issued a circular on the issuance of a temporary license to allow microinsurance businesses
to begin operation.

Constraints, Challenges, and Gaps

Legal and regulatory framework. The legal and regulatory framework for insurance that
is currently used in Cambodia has not fulfilled the 28 core principles of IAIS, such as the
core principles on liquidation and autonomy of the regulator's power. This gap requires
26 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

                        attention to gradually amend the legal and regulatory framework to achieve effective
                        insurance sector supervision and development.

                        The existing law and regulations on insurance have strict requirements for granting
                        licenses to insurance agents, brokers, and loss adjusters. As of December 2011, only two
                        insurance agents and one insurance broker were licensed. To motivate participation of
                        insurance agents, brokers, and loss adjusters in the development of the sector, some
                        revisions to regulations were necessary.

                        The government is making efforts to create life insurance and microinsurance markets to
                        respond to actual needs and speed the development of Cambodia's insurance market.
                        This market faces a number of challenges, such as strengthening the management and
                        supervision capacity of the regulator, the market mechanism, and awareness of the life
                        insurance product. Based on international experience, supervising life insurance companies
                        is more difficult than supervising general insurance companies.

                        The insurance companies that are operating in Cambodia have limited options for investing
                        their capital and reserves locally. The government has launched a securities market to
                        provide investment options for insurance companies that want to diversify investment
                        of their reserves and capital and thereby contribute to the development of the financial
                        system. In the medium term, setting the threshold on insurance company capital reserves
                        is important to ensure an adequate solvency margin is maintained by insurance companies,
                        but it could be a challenge for insurance companies to meet these requirements.

                        Institutional framework. Modern insurance market management requires policy and an
                        institutional and legal framework for management and supervision of the insurance sector
                        that is based on the core insurance principles issued by IAIS. For the policy framework,
                        Cambodia requires a specific body dedicated to policy formulation, but the existing
                        insurance regulator has limited capacity and regulatory autonomy.

                        In the past, the insurance market in Cambodia progressed slowly as some market
                        management mechanisms were not well developed, especially the mechanism for
                        litigation. The process for claim settlement and mediation was very slow. The government
                        is making efforts to develop the dispute resolution mechanism, including establishing a
                        commercial court.

                        Experience from the 2008­2009 financial crisis showed that the government lacked a
                        clear mechanism for coordinating relevant institutions to manage any risks to the financial
                        sector as a whole.

                        Insurance market mechanism. Despite the availability of insurance services in Cambodia
                        for more than a decade, the general public's understanding of the value of insurance is
                        limited. Currently, insurance services are bought only by limited numbers of people in
                        urban areas and by foreign companies.

                        In recent years, the arrival of new insurance companies has increased competition within
                        Cambodia's insurance market, although each company has tried to differentiate itself
                        from the others with different service levels, product innovations, or pricing differentials.
                        The market share of Cambodia's first insurance companies has declined due to strong
                        competition from the new companies.
                                                                                             Nonbanking Financial Sector 27

The implementation of compulsory insurance for construction sites, commercial motor
vehicles, and passenger transport, which began in 2002, has not been effective due to lack
of enforcement measures and lack of cooperation among relevant ministries and institutions.

The Ministry of Labor and Vocational Training's introduction of compulsory schemes for
workers' compensation and health insurance is expected to reduce the business of private
insurance companies. Private and public organizations should maintain a coordinated
approach with regard to these products to ensure that workers are being effectively
covered for all areas of risk and that the private sector can still offer health and workers'
compensation products that the market may be interested in buying.

Currently, there is overlap regarding institutions that provide insurance products. For
example, a few commercial banks offer insurance products to their clients, leading to a
lack of clarity between the jurisdictions of banks and insurance companies.

Capacity building. Although the insurance regulator has made efforts in recent years
to increase staffing, the need for competent, experienced, and skilled human resources
remains a big challenge for the Cambodian regulator. Retaining qualified staff is an
immediate challenge for the regulator because of competition from the private sector.

Specific skills for the insurance sector such as product development, underwriting, claim
processing, claim procedure arrangements, loss adjustors or surveyors, actuarial and
financial analysis and forecasting expertise, and insurance agency training are not yet
available within the local market. These skills will take time to develop in Cambodia and
as a result will slow down the development of new products. Cambodia needs a specific
training center with proper insurance training programs and will require many years of
effort to develop the specialized expertise needed to keep up with developments in the
international insurance market.

Development of an "early warning" information technology system. As the insurance
market grows, the regulator should have the capacity to operate an "early warning
system" that can be used to collect information from insurance companies so that the
financial analysis and risk profiling skills of insurance companies can be determined in a
timely manner.

Future Strategy and Plan

Maintaining the stability and the development of the insurance sector should contribute
to socioeconomic development by using the capital and reserves of insurance companies
to invest in securities, real estate, agriculture, and other sectors with growth potential.
The development of the insurance sector could also contribute tremendously to
Cambodia's social sector through employment creation, development of specialized
skills, and specialized training, as well as providing a social safety net for people by
offering health insurance and minimizing their spending on traffic accidents.

Legal and regulatory framework. While there are gaps between the core principles of
IAIS and the current legislation in Cambodia, the gaps are considered acceptable given the
state of insurance industry development. To close the gap, the government will submit a
new insurance law to the legislature, and the insurance regulator will review the existing
regulations to ensure consistency with the new law. For the long-term strategy, the
28 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

                        insurance regulator will fully implement the core principles of IAIS, a critical standard for
                        prudential management and supervision of the insurance sector.

                        The regulator must review the legal and regulatory framework relating to insurance agents
                        and brokers in order to promote the development of these intermediary businesses and
                        ensure that clients get accurate information on insurance products. In the medium term,
                        the regulator will encourage the establishment of associations of insurance agents and
                        brokers to help develop the sector.

                        The sale of life and microinsurance will place more demands on the Cambodian insurance
                        regulator. To manage the pressure, the regulator will establish the necessary regulatory
                        framework and develop the required skills.

                        Based on the current size and structure of the insurance market, the regulator may not
                        apply risk-based capital yet. However, in the medium term, the regulator will review the
                        prakas on the solvency margin for general insurance companies and consider developing
                        the risk-based capital strategy, with the intention of institutionalizing strong prudential
                        measures when the insurance market is more developed.

                        Institutional framework. In the near future, the government will set up a unit that is
                        responsible for formulating policy for the Cambodian insurance sector in order to ensure
                        that the policy framework supports sustainable development of the industry. This unit
                        shall be responsible for policy, strategy formulation, and conducting insurance industry-
                        related studies in Cambodia.

                        The present institutional framework for the insurance industry does not adequately cover
                        the fast-growing insurance industry, especially with the expected introduction of life
                        insurance and microinsurance in the near future. Therefore, the government will enhance
                        the capacity of the insurance regulator and give the regulator sufficient autonomy and
                        authority to cover the scope of the expanding insurance market, and in the longer term,
                        may establish an independent commission to supervise the insurance sector.

                        The regulator of insurance will establish an office to handle disputes over insurance claims.
                        Except in cases that require criminal prosecution, this should help resolve complaints
                        without resorting to arbitration or the courts. The purpose of establishing such an office
                        is to promote confidence of the insured and prevent possible fraud in insurance claims
                        that might damage the insurance market.

                        In accord with core insurance principles, the insurance industry regulator will cooperate
                        with relevant financial supervisory institutions, including the Ministry of Economy and
                        Finance (MEF), National Bank of Cambodia (NBC), and Securities and Exchange Commission
                        of Cambodia (SECC), in order to prevent or mitigate potential financial sector crises that
                        might affect the economy as a whole.

                        Insurance market mechanism. To improve and expand the insurance market, the
                        regulator will prepare an action plan for promoting the benefits of insurance to the public.
                        This public awareness program will cover at least a 3-year period.

                        The government will encourage the implementation of compulsory insurance for
                        construction sites, commercial motor vehicles, and passenger transport. Concurrently, the
                                                                                             Nonbanking Financial Sector 29

regulator will prepare a work schedule and coordinate with concerned ministries and
institutions to better promote the implementation of compulsory insurance and consider
expanding compulsory insurance for all types of vehicles.

The regulator will cooperate with concerned institutions to develop a coordinated
approach regarding insurance products for workers' compensation and health insurance
in order to ensure that workers and employees can efficiently obtain insurance to cover all
risks. However, insurance companies will still be able to underwrite health insurance and
workers' compensation products to meet market needs.

Since some commercial banks have been offering insurance products, in the medium
term, the regulator will formulate policy and guidelines on insurance operations by other
institutions in the financial sector.

The government has established the Cambodia Life Insurance Company, a joint venture
with international insurance partners in an effort to encourage the development of a life
insurance market. In the medium term, the regulator will promote the establishment of
an association of life insurance providers.

Capacity building. The regulator will develop a policy to retain and develop its officers.
To achieve this goal as soon as possible, the regulator will develop and deliver training to
build insurance expertise and motivate insurance officers so they can successfully fulfill
their defined roles.

In the short term, the regulator will cooperate with GIAC in order to organize training
programs for officers in the regulator's office and staff in insurance companies. This will
build general skills in the insurance sector. The regulator will also cooperate with the
Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports to develop a curriculum that tertiary education
institutions can deliver to build Cambodian students' basic insurance knowledge before
they enter insurance industry jobs.

In the medium term, the government will establish an insurance institute for offering
specialized insurance training, with the goal of transforming the institute into a regionally
and globally accredited insurance research and development center.

Life insurance will largely be sold on a face-to-face basis, which could result in agents
deceiving their clients. Hence, to protect clients, the regulator will cooperate with GIAC in
organizing courses on the industry's code of ethics for all life insurance agents.

Development of an "early warning" information technology system. The regulator will
create an early warning information technology (IT) system within the next 3 years to help
prevent unforeseen crises in the industry. In 5 to 7 years, the insurance sector is expected to
be large enough to justify spending on such a system.

Pensions

The government has created the National Social Security Fund for Civil Servants (NSSFC),
the National Fund for Veterans (NFV), the Persons with Disability Foundation (PWDF),
and the National Social Security Fund (NSSF). These pension funds have been created
30 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

                        for social protection and development of the economy through provision of funds for
                        long-term investment.

                        The Ministry of Labor and Vocational Training is responsible for implementing
                        the Law on the Social Safety Scheme for those who are subject to the provisions
                        of the Labor Law. The Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation
                        (MoSVY) is responsible for implementing the social safety scheme for the public
                        sector employees, and the ministry is also drafting a law on the social security
                        scheme for all Cambodian citizens. The MEF, however, is preparing a new draft law
                        on insurance that will create voluntary pension schemes for private sector workers
                        or employees.

                        In preparing policies and the legal framework for implementing each pension scheme,
                        Cambodia faces challenges due to the limited capacity of both institutions and individuals.
                        To achieve institutional agreement, the government needs to develop an institutional
                        coordinating mechanism covering operation of these pension funds. It also needs to
                        define how to implement sustainable pension schemes in Cambodia to ensure that
                        the responsible ministries provide an effective enabling environment for implementing
                        each scheme.

                        The priorities for the development of each pension scheme include (i) in the short
                        term, development of legal frameworks pertaining to institutions, infrastructure, and
                        expertise; (ii) in the medium term, interagency coordination in order to centralize both
                        infrastructure and service delivery so that work is carried out efficiently and operational
                        costs are minimized; and (iii) in the longer term, development of IT for centralized data
                        management and service delivery, and a strong e-communication system that will ensure
                        efficient and transparent administration of pension schemes.

                The National Social Security Fund for Civil Servants

                  Background

                        In compliance with the Rectangular Strategy of the government to improve the social
                        security scheme for civil servants, including those who have retired, become disabled, or
                        are the dependents of deceased civil servants, MoSVY is making development of a civil
                        service social protection system a priority.

                        MoSVY is establishing the NSSFC, which is the public institution responsible for providing
                        social security benefits to all civil servants, including those who have retired, become
                        disabled, or are the dependents of deceased civil servants.

                        The NSSFC was established by Sub-decree No. 14 ANKR.BK dated 5 February 2008
                        on the Establishment of National Social Security Fund for Civil Servants and conforms
                        to Royal Decree No. NS/RKT/0108/039 dated 18 January 2008 on Social Security
                        Benefits for Civil Servants. The NSSFC is a public establishment that is technically
                        and financially supervised by MoSVY and MEF, respectively. The NSSFC is responsible
                        for providing six benefits to civil servants: a retirement pension, a disability pension,
                        benefits following a work injury, and maternity, death, and dependents' benefits,
                                                                                             Nonbanking Financial Sector 31

in accordance with the principles of good governance, transparency, efficiency,
and responsiveness.

Progress and Achievements

To date, social security benefits for civil servants have been provided through MoSVY and
other ministries or institutions subsidized by the government. However, the government
is now preparing to introduce the NSSFC, which will manage the benefits process and
use the banking system to ensure efficiency, transparency, accountability, and compliance
with the Law on the Public Financial System.

A sub-decree on determination of the rates of contribution to the NSSFC was adopted on
29 April 2011. Also, a draft sub-decree on social health insurance for civil servants is being
prepared with the objective of improving the welfare of civil servants.

Constraints, Challenges, and Gaps

As a newly established institution, the NSSFC faces many challenges, including limited
human resources, lack of a data management system, and inadequate workspace. The
NSSFC needs to expand its operations in the capital as well as the provinces, cities,
districts, and khans (urban districts), and requires more staff and workspace for this. The
current system of data management, which does not use IT, is difficult to use for analysis,
planning, and policy formulation.

Future Strategy and Plan

In order to promote the development of the NSSFC, it is necessary to build its capacity and
expand its staff and workspace.

The NSSFC will offer new social health insurance to improve the welfare of civil servants.

The funds of the NSSFC will be invested under the direction of the government in order to
contribute to financial sector development.

The NSSFC will consider becoming a member of the ASEAN Social Security Association and
cooperate with concerned ministries and government institutions as well as development
partners in order to establish networks with experts and obtain quality information
and training.

The NSSFC will equip itself with an IT system for managing data and providing benefits.

The National Fund for Veterans

Background

According to the Rectangular Strategy of the government, the NFV is one of many priorities
intended to improve the welfare of veterans and their dependents.
32 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

                        MoSVY has been providing a social security scheme to veterans using funds provided
                        through the government budget.

                        The NFV was established by Royal Decree No. NS/RKT/0710/595 dated 15 July 2010
                        and Sub-decree No. 79 ANKr.BK dated 23 July 2010 on the Establishment of a National
                        Fund for Veterans. The NFV provides benefits for veterans who are retirees or become
                        disabled and these include maternity, first marriage, illness, death, and disability
                        benefits, as well as benefits while recovering from an injury. Veterans' dependents
                        also receive benefits.

                  Progress and Achievements

                        The NFV is preparing to introduce a social security scheme for veterans that will operate
                        through the banking system and follow the principles of good governance, transparency,
                        efficiency, and responsiveness.

                        The NFV is preparing a strategic plan and budget, and developing the human resources
                        required for effective functioning.

                  Constraints, Challenges, and Gaps

                        As the NFV has been recently established, it has yet to develop the required regulatory
                        framework, or adequate human or financial resources and office space, and these
                        deficiencies must be addressed to ensure efficiency in administering the social
                        security scheme.

                        The NFV does not have an IT system yet for efficiently managing data on veterans and
                        their dependents. The current management information system is challenging to use for
                        analyzing and monitoring data for policy development and forecasting of veterans' social
                        welfare needs.

                  Future Strategy and Plan

                        The NFV will prepare a prioritized plan for institutional development that focuses on the
                        preparation of a legal framework; staff capacity building; and acquisition of workspace,
                        an IT system, and support from development partners.

                        The NFV will establish offices in the capital and the provinces, cities, districts, and khans in
                        order to facilitate delivery of services to veterans and their dependents.

                        The NFV will draft a sub-decree on determining contribution rates for the NFV.

                        The funds of the NFV will be invested under the direction of the government in order to
                        contribute to financial sector development.

                        The NFV will consider becoming a member of the ASEAN Social Security Association
                        in order to share lessons learned and gain knowledge for the NFV's institutional
                        development.
                                                                                             Nonbanking Financial Sector 33

The Persons with Disability Foundation

Background

Cambodia has experienced decades of war and a genocidal regime that had many
negative consequences, including a high number of people with disabilities. In addition,
there are land mines and other explosives that continue to kill and injure, traffic accidents,
work accidents, malnutrition, disease, and other causes for the high number of people
with disabilities. According to the 2008 National Census Report, 1.4% of the Cambodian
population is disabled in some form, and persons with disabilities are usually poor
and vulnerable.

The government is working hard to promote the welfare of people with disabilities
by following the Constitution of the Kingdom of Cambodia, the policies and the
Rectangular Strategy of the government's 4th mandate, and the Cambodian Millennium
Development Goals.

Progress and Achievements

The government, and especially MoSVY, has introduced policies and regulations to extend
the basic rights of people with disabilities. The Law on the Protection and Promotion
of the Rights of People with Disabilities has been adopted, and Cambodia has signed
the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and adopted
a National Plan of Action for Persons with Disabilities, including land mine survivors.
Cambodia has also passed sub-decrees on establishing the Disability Action Council,
recruiting people with disabilities, the organization and functioning of the PWDF, and a
subsidy scheme for disabled veterans living in the community.

The PWDF has been established as a public institution to implement relevant laws,
national plans, and policies, and, in particular, to offer a social safety net to persons
with disabilities.

Constraints, Challenges, and Gaps

As a newly established institution, the PWDF faces many constraints and challenges such
as a lack of technical staff, budget, office equipment, a data management system, and
offices in the capital, provinces, cities, districts, and khans.

Future Strategy and Plan

In order to promote and improve the welfare of people with disabilities, a prioritized plan
for the PWDF will focus mainly on the following: (i) developing institutions and building
staff capacity, (ii) reviewing and improving the role of staff at the central level and in
PWDF branch offices across the country, (iii) developing an action plan and regulations
regarding financial management of the PWDF, (iv) implementing policies on the provision
of allowances, (v) allocating budget, and (vi) developing IT and database systems in
consultation with relevant ministries or institutions and nongovernment organizations.
34 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

                The National Social Security Fund

                  Background

                        A pension scheme is specified under the Law on Social Security Schemes for persons who
                        are subject to the provisions of the Labor Law. This law was passed and promulgated
                        in September 2002 in order to create a social security system that includes pensions,
                        workers' or employees' injury insurance, and other benefits to be defined by sub-decree
                        as economic conditions permit.

                        The pension scheme shall be administered by the NSSF, established by Sub-decree No. 16
                        ANKr.BK dated 2 March 2007. The NSSF is a public administration entity with a mission
                        to deliver social security schemes. It is under the technical and financial guardianship
                        of the Ministry of Labor and Vocational Training and MEF, respectively. The NSSF
                        started operations at the end of 2008 and is introducing, in sequence, three benefits
                        schemes: the Employment Injury Insurance Scheme, a health insurance scheme, and a
                        pension scheme.

                        The NSSF will offer social security services to all workers or employees who are covered
                        by the Law on Social Security Schemes for persons defined by the provisions of the Labor
                        Law, for which the NSSF is required to register members, collect contributions, manage
                        funds, and process and pay out benefits to members or their dependents.

                  Progress and Achievements

                        The Employment Injury Insurance Scheme has been implemented since November
                        2008. As of December 2011, the total number of enterprises registered with the NSSF
                        was approximately 1,964, with about 530,000 workers (garment and shoe enterprises
                        comprise more than 400,000 workers), and the NSSF has paid out occupational risk
                        benefits to 11,000 workers.

                        By the end of 2011, the NSSF had released around 3.5 billion riels to provide benefits for
                        workers affected by occupational injury, equal to 10.9% of total contributions.

                        In addition to implementing technical work, the NSSF is concerned with forming policy
                        and regulations to improve implementation of the Employment Injury Insurance Scheme
                        and prepare for launching the two other schemes under its responsibility (the health care
                        scheme and pension scheme).

                  Constraints, Challenges, and Gaps

                        Through running the Employment Injury Insurance Scheme, the NSSF has identified a
                        number of problems that need to be addressed. The main challenges and constraints
                        include employers who fail to report how many workers or employees they have, what
                        they pay their workers or employees, and how many branches their company has. Some
                        employers also fail to complete monthly reports on staff numbers, fail to pay their NSSF
                        contributions on time and fail to submit accurate and timely reports on occupational
                        injuries. In addition, some workers or employees do not have Cambodian identity cards
                        and most married persons do not have marriage certificates, and thus are not eligible for
                                                                                             Nonbanking Financial Sector 35

survivors' benefits. In future, problems like these could adversely affect the introduction
of a pension scheme.

The current NSSF building has capacity only for the staff who are working on the
Employment Injury Insurance Scheme.

Future Plan and Strategy

The NSSF plans to introduce a health care scheme in 2012 and a pension scheme by 2015.
The main components of the plan for implementing the pension scheme over 2011­2020
include the following:

     · C onducting a feasibility study for setting up the pension scheme based on
         analysis of data from the Cambodian Socio-Economic Survey, the results of which
         are important for preparing pension schemes, and setting up a task force for
         considering the role and responsibilities of the scheme and preparing the required
         legislative framework.

     · Buildingthecapacityforimplementingthepensionschemethroughparticipationin
         and organization of conferences, study tours, and domestic and overseas training.

     · Setting up legal instruments for implementing the pension scheme, such as
         defining formalities and procedures for registration, contribution rates, and
         pension scheme benefits.

     · Analyzing or assessing social security benefit packages and contribution rates
         to pension schemes and reviewing available data from the Cambodian Socio-
         Economic Survey and other sources, in cooperation with an international actuary
         review of available survey data.

     · D eveloping an IT system, including designing the database system and setting
         up the IT network that is necessary for efficient operations and reducing
         administrative costs. This IT system will be installed in each NSSF provincial office
         to provide the central office in the capital with easy access to data. In the context
         of an upgraded IT system, the development of a pension scheme management
         system will be designed in such a way that it will link to banks' management
         information systems.

     · Introducingvariousmechanismssuchasfingerprintingandshortmessageservice
         systems that identify NSSF members, and seeking cooperation from development
         partner(s) and other countries that have experience with successful pension schemes.

     · ExpandingorconstructinganewcentralofficefortheNSSFinordertoaccommodate
         the additional staff needed to operate health insurance and pension schemes.

Private Voluntary Pensions

Background

The government has been targeting the provision of social security services to Cambodian
citizens and is preparing to grant pension benefits to civil servants, employees of private
companies, and Cambodian citizens, in general. It is also preparing a legal and regulatory
framework for developing private voluntary pensions for individuals as well as private
companies. This private voluntary pension is a product of a life insurance company.
36 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

                  Constraints, Challenges, and Gaps

                        Regulatory framework. The MoSVY has prepared a draft revised law on social security for
                        Cambodian citizens and it only covers the pensions offered by the government. For private
                        voluntary pensions, there is no legal framework or regulations in place to cover it yet.

                        Institutional framework. At present, Cambodia does not have any institution to manage
                        and supervise activities associated with the provision of private voluntary pensions.

                        Market development and mechanism. In Cambodia, the need to save through different
                        financial products such as a bank deposit, purchase of insurance, and use of pension
                        services is limited. At the same time, the market for private voluntary pensions does not
                        exist in Cambodia.

                        Capacity building. Some of the skills needed for developing a private voluntary pension
                        include, but are not limited to, financial analysis, risk analysis, product development,
                        product sales promotion, investment, and data management.

                  Future Strategy and Plan

                        Regulatory framework. The government has been preparing a strategy for private
                        voluntary pension development. When this strategy is adopted, the insurance regulator
                        will prepare the necessary policies for establishing a private voluntary pension and also
                        prepare the legal and regulatory framework for supervision.

                        Institutional framework. In the short term, the MEF, as the insurance regulator, will
                        establish an office to administer pension funds so that the financial status, and in particular
                        the private voluntary pension, can be monitored and controlled.

                        In the medium term, the government will promote the development of specialized
                        companies for managing private voluntary pension funds.

                        Market development and mechanism. The government will promote the concept of
                        operating a private voluntary pension in Cambodia through the international community,
                        and especially within ASEAN, in order to attract interest from specialized companies that
                        manage such funds.

                        Capacity building. The government will recruit additional officials for the insurance
                        regulator and organize specialized training for them so that they can respond to the
                        needs of the private voluntary pension market in Cambodia.

                Capital Market

                  Background

                        The development of a securities market, which includes a capital market and a money
                        market, were envisioned in the Financial Sector Blueprint for 2001­2010 and the
                        Financial Sector Development Strategy 2006­2015. Now the government is putting
                                                                                             Nonbanking Financial Sector 37

a securities market into operation, but it will take years for the market to develop
and mature.

Cambodia's financial sector development plan can benefit from the ASEAN long-term
goal through cross-border cooperation among capital markets in the region.

Progress and Achievements

Through the implementation of the Financial Sector Development Strategy 2006­2015, in
July 2008, the government established the SECC.

The SECC is mandated to supervise the operation of the securities market. Also in
2008, the Sub-decree on the Organization and the Conduct of the SECC was issued
and became effective on 23 July 2008. This sub-decree defines the composition of
the SECC (eight members led by the Minister of Economy and Finance) as well as the
functions of the SECC director general and six departments, including the Internal
Audit Unit.

Development of the legal and regulatory framework. In 2007, the government adopted
securities-related laws that provide a foundation for developing Cambodia's securities
market. These include the Law on Government Securities, the Law on the Issuance and
Trading of Non-Government Securities, and the Law on Insolvency.

The Law on Government Securities was promulgated on 10 January 2007. This law permits
the government, represented by MEF, to issue government securities to the public in order
to finance the budget deficit or to fund long-term infrastructure projects. In 2005, MEF
issued short-term (91-day) government securities worth 49.9 billion riels, which were
mostly bought by banks.

The Law on the Issuance and Trading of Non-Government Securities was promulgated
on 19 October 2007, to regulate securities market operators, clearance and settlement
facility operators, securities depository operators, and other participants in the securities
markets who trade and provide securities services, as well as public limited companies or
permitted entities who issue securities to the public.

The Law on Insolvency was promulgated in December 2007, and is intended to establish
the rules, conditions, procedures, and proceedings governing insolvency. This legislation
applies to all business owners and legal entities that own assets in Cambodia, and is
designed to assure creditors of their right to demand repayment from debtors in a
transparent and fair manner.

The Sub-decree on Implementation of the Law on Issuance and Trading of Non-
Government Securities was signed on 8 April 2009. The purpose of the sub-decree is to
prescribe requirements with respect to (i) conditions for public offerings and issuance
of securities; (ii) disclosure of the documents submitted for approval and registration
with the SECC; (iii) the conditions to be met by persons applying to operate a securities
market, a clearance and settlement facility, or a securities depository; (iv) granting
a license to securities firms and securities representatives; (v) the operation of a
collective investment scheme; and (vi) corporate governance for directors and senior staff
of public limited companies or permitted entities.
38 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

                        Development of a government securities market. A government securities market would
                        help facilitate the development of the interbank market and provide the foundation for
                        money markets to develop. It would also provide a useful instrument for the government
                        to mobilize resources domestically to fund its fiscal deficits.

                        Government securities could be a major tool for promoting monetary policy to increase
                        use of the riel. A broad-based government securities market would be essential for the
                        conduct of open market operations. Government securities denominated in riel may be
                        issued and put as reserve eligible, up to a suitable level, in order to lower the cost of
                        non-interest bearing cash reserves and to promote use of the riel for securities trading.
                        Government securities would provide a risk-free investment alternative and limit bank
                        exposure to nonbank investors, such as insurance companies. Insurance companies
                        may also invest in government securities under repurchase agreements to limit their
                        unsecured exposure to banks. Government securities would enable an insurer to avoid
                        putting all of their proceeds into a bank that could pose a risk if the bank failed. With
                        the issuance of government securities, there will be costs, but the government would
                        receive the benefit from increasing additional financing sources that would not exert
                        pressure on inflation.

                        Issuance of government securities should appropriately link to the government's borrowing
                        scheme to meet borrowing conditions. The bidding procedure and system should be in
                        place to promote sales and distribution.

                        Operation. On 20 November 2006, MEF signed a memorandum of understanding with
                        the Korea Exchange to develop a Cambodia Securities Exchange. The Government of
                        the Republic of Korea, through the Korea Exchange, provided their support to train and
                        educate future participants in the Cambodian market, with a sum of $1.8 million for a
                        3-year program (2007 to 2009).

                        On 23 March 2009, MEF signed an agreement with the Korea Exchange to establish
                        the Cambodia Securities Exchange. MEF holds a 55% share while the Korea Exchange
                        holds 45%. The Cambodia Securities Exchange has been authorized by the SECC to be a
                        securities market operator, a clearance and settlement facility operator, and a securities
                        depository operator.

                        Market participants. On 20 October 2010, the SECC granted licenses to 15 securities
                        firms, of which 7 are licensed as underwriters, 2 as dealers, 4 as brokers, and 2 as
                        investment advisors. The SECC also granted accreditation to securities-related cash
                        settlement agents, securities registrars, securities transfer agents, paying agents,
                        professional accounting firms, and independent auditors and valuation companies
                        providing services in the securities sector.

                        In January 2011, the SECC signed a memorandum of understanding with the Financial
                        Institute of Cambodia to offer education and training to the public.

                  Constraints, Challenges, and Gaps

                        A linkage between securities market operations and the national payment system needs to
                        be created in order to promote a smooth and efficient securities market. Implementation
                        of the recommended securities settlement procedures using "delivery vs. payment" will
                                                                                             Nonbanking Financial Sector 39

require that an automated system is in place. An automated system will remove the risk
associated with delays in the physical transfer of securities. Gradual introduction of a
complete payment system by NBC at the end of 2011 should ensure that an electronic
system for settlement and instant transfer of securities is in place, and meets market needs
and the requirements of the SECC.

Market transparency. After conducting a joint study with the SECC, the National
Accounting Council has adopted the interim accounting standards for listed companies
prior to the implementation of the Cambodian International Financial Reporting Standards
in 2012.

Development of other segments of the securities market. When an equity market
has moved one step forward in the entire market development, other segments of the
securities market will also have to develop over time to meet the needs of the emerging
market, especially the long-term debt market.

Diversification of financial instruments and investment mechanisms. The market has
not yet developed because of the absence of tradable instruments and intermediaries that
will create the market. Also, there is a lack of investment mechanisms to pool funds from
small investors and professional fund managers.

Investor education and protection. In the operation of a securities market, illegal
activities could occur and this requires adequate protection for investors. At the same time,
many investors are not aware of the sophistication required for the trading of financial
instruments; they need to be properly educated about the processes of a securities market.

Future Strategy and Plan

Operations. Gaps in the current legal and regulatory framework will need to be
filled, such as issues related to possible bankruptcies in the securities market. Other
supporting structures will have to be established that include a depository/depositories,
a clearing and settlement facility, and a cash settlement system that will allow "delivery
vs. payment." To facilitate market transactions, the mechanism and procedures for
securities borrowing and lending need to be developed as well. Capacity to undertake
asset valuation for securities market transactions that meet international standards will
have to be developed, in particular to align with ASEAN standards. Moreover, as the
market broadens and gains in sophistication, the SECC will enhance its IT systems to
improve information disclosures and market monitoring and surveillance.

Following the approach taken in other countries, it will be important for the SECC to
conduct an in-depth self-assessment to confirm whether the system being developed
conforms to the core principles of the International Organization of Securities
Commissions (IOSCO) and the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems as well
as the IOSCO recommendations on securities settlement systems. After undergoing
such a self-assessment, the SECC should consider gaining full membership with IOSCO
so that it can network with other securities commissions globally and keep abreast of
best practices.

Corporate governance. The practice of good corporate governance will have to be
instilled among both listed and unlisted companies. Initially, the SECC will introduce the
40 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

                        prakas on corporate governance to listed companies for their implementation and then
                        extend the prakas to unlisted companies. An educational campaign will be carried out
                        to assist this process, with emphasis on the responsibilities of the board of directors,
                        corporate secretaries, independent directors, and the management team.

                        Investor protection and education. To avoid and minimize the incidence of market abuse,
                        the SECC will further organize education for investors and open the way for investors to
                        lodge their complaints to the SECC. Also, a mechanism and center for dispute resolution
                        will be established for addressing disputes in the market.

                        Promote education and awareness through the news media. With recognition of the
                        key role of news media in the securities industry as a result of their reporting and analysis,
                        the SECC will organize training for financial and other journalists and establish a liaison
                        office for coordinating with journalists. This should enhance professional ethics in the
                        journalism profession.

                        Develop other segments of the securities market. After an equity market has been
                        introduced, the government will develop debt markets in Cambodia, particularly the
                        corporate bond market. To facilitate the development of this market, a regulatory
                        framework and a credit rating agency will need to be established to support issuance
                        of debt securities. Apart from this, a feasibility study on commodity futures exchange is
                        needed for scaling up the development of agricultural and industrial production. Along
                        with this, the introduction of derivatives and hedging instruments must be given due
                        consideration to respond to market risks over the medium term.

                        Diversify investment vehicles and investment mechanisms. To allow a broad-based
                        market to develop, the SECC could promote the operation of nonbank financial institutions
                        under the proposed financial trust law that is expected to be passed in the future, as
                        well as collective investment schemes for pooling investment funds and other forms of
                        investment mechanisms.

                        Financial instruments and market mechanisms. The government will consider the
                        possibility of developing other mechanisms, such as the facilities to allow borrowing and
                        lending of securities and the setting up of a securities financing company to provide
                        financial support to market players in the securities market. Also, there is a need to study
                        the possibility of setting up a sovereign wealth fund to manage surpluses or excess liquidity
                        that can be channeled to productive investments.

                        Financial development district. The government will establish a financial development
                        district with the objective of contributing to sustainable financial sector development. The
                        district will offer tax incentives to financial services businesses within the country in order
                        to attract more broad-based investment in the sector and to provide additional support
                        for securities market development.
Chapter Title

CHAPTER 4

Governance
and Infrastructure

Managing the Reform Process:
Legal and Regulatory Framework

Background

The Financial Sector Blueprint 2001­2010, and the update in 2006 (Financial Sector
Development Strategy 2006­2015), outlined preconditions for Cambodia developing
a sound market-based financial system. These preconditions include policy, law, and
institutions that support the implementation of effective finance market mechanisms
and governance.

Policy, law, and institutions constitute the foundation for financial market operations. This
foundation lays out policies to set goals and give directions, provides a legal framework
to give effect to the policies and create the enabling environment, and establishes
institutions equipped with systems, mechanisms, and processes for efficient and sound
financial market operations.

This strategic document outlined the legal and regulatory framework for commercial and
financial transactions, including the Law on Commercial Enterprises, the Law on Insolvency
or Bankruptcy, the Law on Secured Transactions, the Civil Code, the Code of Civil Procedure,
and the Law on Commercial Arbitration. Activities to support law enforcement include the
enhancement of public confidence, consultation, transparency, and public dissemination
of laws and regulations.

Progress and Achievements

The government has made significant progress against the goals of the Financial Sector
Development Strategy in developing the legal and regulatory framework for commercial
and financial transactions in Cambodia. Some laws and regulations have been enacted
while others are in the process of adoption.

Constraints, Challenges, and Gaps

Harmonization of financial laws and regulations. As a result of the rapid pace
of reforms, there are a number of challenges in implementing the laws, rules, and
regulations that lead to differences in interpretation. Challenges include (i) legislation and
regulation development that is dependent on donors' program deadlines, (ii) differences
in understanding on the part of concerned implementing agencies that must cooperate to

                                                                                                41
42 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

                        implement the laws, (iii) reliance on foreign legal experts due to Cambodian's limited legal
                        expertise, and (iv) experts that propose competing methodologies. In line with the state of
                        Cambodia's financial sector development, the government will harmonize the mechanism
                        for implementing financial law and regulations by taking into consideration the impact on
                        financial sector development.

                        Challenges in developing laws and regulations. Major gaps include (i) absence of a
                        central law registry, as the existing laws and regulations have not been officially translated
                        and compiled, and it is therefore difficult for government officials and the public to get
                        to know those laws; and (ii) absence of a specialized central body for drafting law that
                        is staffed with legal experts who are capable of comprehensively reviewing financial laws
                        and regulations.

                        Commercial legal framework development. The challenges include (i) lack of regulations
                        for implementing the law on commercial contracts; (ii) the delay in introducing the law
                        on the commercial court which requires the establishment of a specialized court (a
                        commitment Cambodia made on accession to the World Trade Organization to meet the
                        private sector's need for strengthened implementation of commercial laws); (iii) the slow
                        pace of establishing the commercial court, which is pending the government's decision;
                        and (iv) delays in establishing the National Center for Commercial Arbitration and in
                        appointing an independent, ongoing executive board.

                  Future Strategy and Plan

                        The government will develop a coordinating mechanism for policy formulation; drafting
                        of laws, regulations, and rules; and their implementation. Important measures to improve
                        the efficiency of the law-making process and harmonization of laws and regulations
                        include consultation and transparency in the process of drafting legislation; appropriate
                        use of international practices; centralization of the drafting of laws; and facilitating easy
                        access to, and application of, laws and regulations. Over the long term, ministries and
                        institutions responsible for making and approving laws, rules, and regulations should
                        undertake impact assessments before doing so.

                        Commercial legal framework development. The government will (i) formulate
                        regulations for implementing the law on the commercial contracts; (ii) introduce the
                        law on commercial court; (iii) establish a commercial court; and (iv) establish a national
                        center for commercial arbitration with an independent, ongoing executive board.

                        In the longer term, the government will develop a financial sector competition
                        policy to prevent anticompetitive practices. This will include a competition law and
                        a consumer protection law. Also over the longer term, the government will establish
                        authorities for enforcing the Competition Law and the Consumer Protection Law. Over
                        the medium term, the government will develop a law on agency, together with its
                        implementing regulations.

                        Draft law on financial trust. A law on financial trust to cover banks and nonbank financial
                        institutions is to be introduced, together with its implementing regulations. The law will
                        support the establishment of general trusts and investment fund vehicles.
                                                                                           Governance and Infrastructure 43

Market Infrastructure: Accounting and Auditing

Background

Accounting and auditing together provide the framework necessary to produce the
financial information needed across all sectors of the economy. All relevant business
entities should be required to produce financial statements in accordance with a
single designated financial reporting framework. This enables comparison of financial
information across all sectors, as well as internationally.

Such an accounting framework has been in place in Cambodia since the earlier part
of 2000. The Law on Corporate Accounts, Their Audit and the Accounting Profession
was adopted in June 2002. The laws and regulations of the Ministry of Economy and
Finance (MEF) require all enterprises to prepare their annual financial statements in
compliance with Cambodian accounting standards based on international accounting
standards. This law also established and defined the requirement for auditing enterprises
in Cambodia as well. In May 2010, the MEF promulgated the Cambodian International
Standards on Auditing and Assurance.

Progress and Achievements

The MEF has introduced law and regulations governing accounting, auditing, and the
accounting professions in Cambodia. These include the Law on Corporate Accounts,
Their Audit and the Accounting Profession; the establishment of the National Accounting
Council and the Kampuchea Institute of Certified Public Accountants and Auditors
(KICPAA); and other regulations.

Constraints, Challenges, and Gaps

Standards compliance. Despite Cambodia having adopted and implemented the full
version of the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), a number of challenges
need to be addressed to match the reality of Cambodia. These are

     (i) compliance and review,
     (ii) adjustment to business realities,
     (iii) contradiction in implementation of regulations by relevant agencies, and
     (iv) capacity of the regulator and operators.

Implementing the IFRS may affect the financial statements of banks and microfinance
institutions, especially to define provisions for substandard loans.

Human resource development. The major challenges regarding improvement of the
qualifications of national public certified accountants include

     · inconsistencyandlackofanappropriatecurriculumatuniversities,
     · unfamiliaritywithaccountingandauditingterminology,and
     · lackofatrainingprogramforcertifiedpublicaccountantsatthenationallevel.
44 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

                  Future Strategy and Plan

                        Transition to the IFRS. Relevant regulatory agencies will develop their action plans to
                        move toward full implementation of the IFRS in all sectors.

                        Monitoring compliance with laws and regulations. The government will strengthen
                        statutory compliance by requiring all enterprises to register (with the possible exception of
                        small enterprises) and to update their details annually. When the new registration system
                        is combined with the existing one, it must be capable of transferring data from the current
                        to the new system.

                        There is a need to review and amend the Law on Corporate Accounts, Their Audit and
                        the Accounting Profession or to develop new accounting and auditing laws and relevant
                        regulations to

                             · removeinconsistenciesbaseduponthesizeoftheenterprisesthatarerequiredto
                                 produce IFRS-based financial statements;

                             · developamechanismformonitoring,reviewing,andassessingcompliancewith
                                 accounting law and standards; and

                             · e mpower the National Accounting Council and KICPAA to perform their
                                 required roles.

                        Capacity development. The government is considering the feasibility of

                             · requiringalluniversitiestoprovideaccountingandauditingsyllabithatfollowIFRS
                                 and the core principles of relevant international standards,

                             · trainingoftrainersandlecturersinaccountingandauditing,and
                             · producinganaccountingandauditinglexiconinKhmer.

                        The government supports the effort to expand the membership of KICPAA by pooling
                        qualified accountants from companies, business enterprises, and entities to promote
                        more effective implementation of international accounting and auditing standards.

                The Payment System

                  Background

                        The economy is still mainly cash-based with limited checks in use and no negotiable
                        instruments. The risks of holding and carrying cash are ever present. In recent years,
                        however, noncash payment has picked up. To support the government regulation that
                        payment for taxes and duties must be made in riel, the National Bank of Cambodia
                        (NBC) has issued regulations requiring all tax payments equivalent to or exceeding
                        4 million riels to be paid by check. This has contributed to the increasing use of checks in
                        business transactions.

                        Safe and efficient payment, clearance, and settlement systems are crucial for financial
                        sector operations. The government is developing its national payment system to support
                        the development of new innovative payment instruments and payment services. Debit
                        and credit cards have been introduced, and more than 500 ATMs were installed
                                                                                           Governance and Infrastructure 45

throughout the country by December 2011. Five commercial banks have set up a
clearing arrangement for their ATM transactions called Easy Cash.

By the end of 2011, NBC had authorized three establishments to offer mobile phone
banking (m-banking) services. These are WING, operated by ANZ Royal Bank; ACLEDA
Unity, operated by ACLEDA Bank; and Cell Card, which is operated by Union Commercial
Bank. Mobile phone banking has extended funds transfer services to rural and remote
areas where formal services are not available. NBC has also issued a prakas on third-party
processors that defines the duties and responsibilities of these service providers, their
scope of operations, and their reporting requirements, including efforts to combat money
laundering and the financing of terrorism.

Progress and Achievements

Following the NBC policy requiring banks to use standardized checks in September 2008,
NBC developed and introduced an interim solution for check clearance in May 2009. All
checks issued by banks' head offices are cleared through the NBC clearinghouse much
faster now than was the case a few years ago. However, checks issued by bank branches
have to be cleared through the nearest clearinghouse of NBC's branches.

NBC has subsequently updated the road map for national payment system development.
A draft law on the national payment system has been prepared with the help of the
International Finance Corporation. NBC has cooperated with the Association of Banks
in Cambodia through its Payment System Subcommittee, which has formed three
working groups to cover the technical, operational, management, and legal aspects for
the development of a full payment and clearance solution. This system will be officially
launched in 2012.

Future Strategy and Plan

In 2012,18 NBC will officially launch the full centralized national clearing and settlement
system, referred to as the "Full Solution," which will provide both local check clearing and
same-day electronic payments between provinces and Phnom Penh, the capital.

The clearinghouse rules and procedures have been updated in line with the rollout of the
"Full Solution." The draft law on the national payment system needs to be adopted to
support the effective implementation of the system.

The development of the domestic capital market requires support from the national
payment system: "delivery vs. payment" in securities transactions, the introduction of
money market operations such as the trading of government securities where clearing
and settlements are processed at NBC, and the enhancement of m-banking services and
regulating new areas of third-party processors' operations.

NBC will in the medium term introduce the Real Time Gross Settlement System after
putting the "Full Solution" into operation to respond more effectively to the increased
operations and settlements of high-value transactions in the market.

18 This has been supported under ADB TA 4999 and TA 7472.
46 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

                        Over the medium to long term, Cambodia will need to consider connecting its payment
                        system with the countries in the region and the rest of the world. Connectivity with the
                        Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication (SWIFT) network has offered
                        one possibility for high-value transactions. In Indonesia, the Philippines, Singapore, and
                        Thailand, the use of SWIFT is currently the backbone for communicating or sending their
                        international financial messages.

                        NBC is considering carrying out a self-assessment of the payment system against
                        compliance with the Bank for International Settlement Core Principles for Systemically
                        Important Payment Systems. This can be done after implementing the "Full Solution" and
                        enacting the law on the national payment system.

                        NBC continues to strengthen regulation and supervision of m-banking, which provides
                        benefits to micro entities and those who do not have access to banking services. However,
                        it also carries considerable risks and needs to be regulated. Future measures need to
                        include (i) the legal framework with provisions for electronic transfer and risk management;
                        (ii) guidelines on a standard for mobile phone messages; (iii) ensuring service providers are
                        consistently delivering on time and reliable; and (iv) addressing challenges in determining
                        whether an e-banking transaction constitutes a deposit, a simple money transfer, or a
                        cross-border transaction.

                        As a member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), Cambodia will need
                        to integrate with other members and prepare to join the ASEAN Payment Network (APN
                        or ASEANPay).

                Credit Bureau

                        NBC has set up a reliable and on-time credit information­sharing system among banks to
                        allow them access to information on repayments with respect to the lending activities of
                        each bank. This should enable banks to avoid lending to delinquent borrowers.

                        NBC has created a credit bureau but allows the private sector to operate it. The credit
                        bureau is owned 51% by the Cambodia Holding Co. and 49% by the equipment provider.
                        The Cambodia Holding Co. is jointly owned by banking institutions and the Cambodia
                        Microfinance Association.

                        NBC issued a prakas in 2011 to regulate the operation of the credit bureau.

                Property Valuation, Estate Services,
                and Housing Development

                  Background

                        Property valuation, estate services, and housing development is another sector that
                        needs to conform with a code of professional ethics and international standards. The
                        government is preparing regulations to strengthen the regulation and supervision of estate
                        development businesses and the valuation profession to increase confidence, protect the
                        interests of customers, and minimize unauthorized business operators.
                                                                                           Governance and Infrastructure 47

Progress and Achievements

Since 2007, the government has granted professional certificates and licenses for
property valuation and estate services to 87 companies. Since 2009, it has granted
business licenses to 20 property developers, and in 2008, the Cambodian Valuers and
Estate Agents Association was established and became the eighth full member of the
ASEAN Valuers Association in 2009.

Constraints, Challenges, and Gaps

The property market is an industry that contributes to the development of the national
economy; however, Cambodia does not have an adequate legal framework to regulate
the sector, and this, in turn, could lead to a number of challenges. These include (i) money
laundering via real estate business activity; (ii) inaccurate property valuation that does
not reflect market prices; (iii) loss of customer and investor confidence in the market;
(iv) limited skills and experience on the part of the regulator, business professionals, and
market participants at all levels of the sector; (v) inability to fully compete with foreign
competitors; and (vi) lack of a professional institute to offer training to property valuers
and service providers.

Future Strategy and Plan

The government will develop the legal and regulatory framework to support property
valuation, estate services, and housing development businesses, including (i) the law on
property valuation and estate services, (ii) the law on housing development, (iii) valuation
standards, (iv) estate service standards, (v) a code of professional ethics for property
valuers and service providers, (vi) a table of commission fees for property valuers and
service providers, and (vii) development of a syllabus and provision of training in property
valuation and services at local universities.
        Book Title

             CHAPTER 5

      Capacity Building

                Background

                     Human capacity development is a priority area for financial sector development in
                     Cambodia. The weaknesses that stifle financial sector development in Cambodia, as well as
                     in other developing countries, include underdevelopment of institutional and commercial
                     frameworks, lack of technical expertise, and limited human capacity. Finding adequately
                     trained and skilled people to meet the needs of a growing financial sector is an ongoing
                     challenge for Cambodia. Rapid sector growth puts pressure on service delivery, customers,
                     and regulatory aspects, which make ongoing capacity building an urgent priority.

                     In the early stage of financial sector development, the government's proactive open market
                     policy enabled Cambodia to attract many experienced foreign bankers. As a result, most
                     of the senior managers are experienced and competent bankers. However, at the middle
                     management level and below, most banks continue to have difficulty in finding qualified
                     staff. Thus, most staff at these levels need substantial professional training in basic banking
                     operations. Most banks have established in-house training courses to deal with this issue
                     and training is also offered by the Cambodia Institute of Banking, the National Bank of
                     Cambodia's (NBC) Center for Banking Studies, and other local institutions.

                     NBC's capacity for supervision of banks and microfinance institutions has been upgraded
                     and strengthened through technical support from ADB and the International Monetary
                     Fund. In the same vein, the General Department of Supervision of NBC has made efforts to
                     train and develop additional capacity of supervisory officers through moving toward full
                     and effective implementation of the Basel I Core Principles and the International Financial
                     Reporting Standards.

                     The insurance regulator and individual companies have trained insurance staff locally with
                     some senior staff having received their training overseas. Some foreign institutes come
                     to Cambodia periodically to offer specialized training courses. Starting in 2007, with
                     technical support from ADB, the insurance regulator's office offered a capacity-building
                     program to improve its technical competence. As a result of the latter, the insurance
                     regulator's office was in a better position to commence on-site supervision.

                Constraints, Challenges, and Gaps

                     In the next stage of financial sector development, Cambodia must continue to provide
                     ongoing support for capacity building. So far, great strides have been made in
                     improving capacity in different areas such as regulation and supervision, the payment

48
                                                                                                           Capacity Building 49

system, establishing a database, disseminating statistical data and information, the
use of information technology, anti-money laundering and counter financing of
terrorist activities.

Updating and upgrading skills is a priority area for deepening the financial system and
for tackling new emerging risks. Financial sector regulators must continue to strengthen
and upgrade the capacity of their own supervision staff in order to be able to effectively
manage these developments.

Three factors that require further capacity development include

     · therapidincreaseinthesizeandnumberofbanksandotherfinancialinstitutions
         regulated and supervised by NBC, the Ministry of Economy and Finance, and the
         Securities and Exchange Commission of Cambodia;

     · theintroductionofnewsystems,products,andinstrumentsasthefinancialmarket
         grows and diversifies; and

     · thelossoftrainedstaff(braindrain)fromthegovernmenttotheprivatesectordue
         to better incentive packages.

This means that policy makers and regulators need to have up-to-date knowledge and skills.
Consequently, technical assistance must be available to support the following activities:

     · Lay down the legal and regulatory framework, raise supervisory capacity, and
         create the enabling environment for the introduction of new financial products
         and institutions. These include nonbank financial institutions that will engage in
         leasing, life insurance, microinsurance, m-banking, money market and capital
         market securities, a real-time gross settlement system for securities market
         transactions, trust and investment operations, and foreign exchange dealings
         when the riel comes into greater use.

     · U pgrade existing systems to conform to ever-changing international standards
         and best practices that require technical assistance and training.

     · Enhance capacity with regard to information technology, economic research,
         and security and administration, among others, to accommodate the growth in
         volume and the types of transactions.

Future Strategy and Plan

There is a need for the government to develop capacity in all areas of the financial sector
by undertaking the following tasks:

     · Assesstrainingneedsthroughagapanalysisfortheentirefinancialsector,from
         entry level to advanced levels of expertise, and from functional areas to specialized
         areas, such as actuarial science. This should identify the type of expertise needed
         in line with this financial sector strategy and the pace of market development.

     · Outsourcehighlyspecializedtrainingorprovidein-housetrainingprograms,on-
         the-job training, and exchange programs with other overseas regulators.

     · Prioritizetrainingneeds,determineresourcerequirements,andcoordinateefforts
         in building capacity to ensure optimal use of available resources.

     · Conductaninstitutionalcostandbenefitanalysistoensurethattrainingefforts
         will be sustainable.
50 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

                             · Raise awareness in each organization of the importance of training and obtain
                                 feedback on training programs to guide future training efforts.

                        The case must be made effectively to those in government who have control over budgets
                        so they provide the financing needed to support ongoing capacity development. For
                        reform actions that are supported by external funding, ministries and institutions must
                        study the operational plans of development partners in order to determine an appropriate
                        strategy for getting their support for financial sector capacity development.

                        In view of the critical role of regulators and supervisors, line ministries and institutions
                        should consider setting the salaries of supervising staff in line with those of the countries
                        in the region. In other countries, funding mechanisms have been developed to provide
                        salaries for regulators and supervisors from independent sources so regulators maintain
                        their autonomy and independence. Regulators and supervisors also receive incentives
                        based on performance, which helps to raise professional standards and strengthen
                        governance, and thereby contribute to maintaining financial sector efficiency and stability.
                                                                                                                             Chapter Title

Action Plan Matrix
CHAPTER 6

Action Plan for Financial
Sector Development
2011­2020

Banking Sector

Key Accomplishments:
     · T hebankingsystemisprivatelyownedwiththemajorityofthelicensedcommercial
         banks having foreign equity interest.
     · T heNationalBankofCambodiatrebledthecapitalrequirementforbanksineffect
         from December 2010.
     · S trengthened regulation and supervision of banks that includes an overhaul of
         reserve requirements, the conduct of corporate governance, fit and proper tests
         and appropriate regulatory requirements to apply for new licenses, and norm
         setting for asset classification and loan provisioning.
     · NBC issued regulations in 2010 to strengthen registration and regulation of
         money changers.
     · NBCestablishedinfrastructureandnegotiableinstrumentsforinterbankoperations.
     · NBCstrengthenedoff-siteandon-sitebankingsupervisioncapability.
     · NBCinstalledanintegratedaccountingsystem(Flexcube)in2010,androlledout
         to all branches.
     · NBCincreasedmonetaryandfinancialcooperationarrangementswithMalaysia,
         Viet Nam and various other countries, and participated in ASEAN forums.
     · N BCwasrestructuredin2011tostrengthenitssupervisoryandoperationalroles,
         and upgrade its IT system.

                                                                                                                                    51
52 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

Future Reforms:

Development                 SHORT-TERM                 MEDIuM-TERM                 LONG-TERM           Agencies
Policy Area              Target 2011­2014            Target 2014­2017          Target 2017­2020       Concerned
Strengthening of
the institutional  · Establish a joint working     · Reassess adequacy       · Periodically reassess  NBC, MEF,
framework             group to conduct                and effectiveness         effectiveness of          SECC
                      a comprehensive                 of the institutional      the institutional
                      assessment of the               framework in              framework and
                      institutional framework         line with the             of the conditions
                      and identify areas for          legal framework.          of cooperation
                      further improvement and                                   among authorities
                      strengthen cooperation       · Identify areas where       in charge of the
                      to maintain the stability       inefficiencies            financial sector.
                      and development of the          are observed.
                      financial sector, with the                             · Where inefficiencies
                      goals of                     · Identify and address       or loopholes are
                                                      issues and problems       identified, take
                       (i) ensuring adequate          arising from the          necessary steps
                            coverage and              implementation            for addressing by
                            effectiveness             of action plans           appropriate means.
                            of assessment,            required toward
                                                      financial integration
                       (ii) identifying the areas     into the ASEAN
                            for improvement           region.
                            through revision of
                            the applicable legal
                            framework, and

                      (iii) supporting the

                            development

                            of cooperation

                            frameworks among

                            the authorities in

                            charge of the

                            financial sector.

                   · With the approval of the
                      government, organize
                      coordinating mechanisms
                      and cooperation among
                      the regulatory authorities.

                   · Pay attention to
                      the following
                      important areas:
                       (i) financial stability
                            and preparedness
                            to manage
                            crisis situations;

                       (ii) cooperate in
                            supervision
                            of financial
                            conglomerates
                            related to banking,
                            securities, and
                            insurance activities,
                            and also achieve
                            convergence
                            with international

                                                                             continued on next page
                    Action Plan for Financial Sector Development 2011­2020 53

Table continued              SHORT-TERM                MEDIuM-TERM              LONG-TERM             Agencies
 Development              Target 2011­2014           Target 2014­2017       Target 2017­2020         Concerned
 Policy Area
                             standards and         · If feasible,           · Periodically reassess  NBC, MEF,
 Establishment               the objective of         establish the            the effectiveness        SECC
 of Financial                regional financial       Financial Sector         of the Financial
 Sector Regulators           integration (ASEAN);     Regulators               Sector Regulators
 Committee             (iii) supervision of           Committee.               Committee in
                             conglomerates                                     light of market
 Review of all               and required          · Ensure the Financial      developments
 finance sector              cooperation for the      Sector Regulators        and convergence
 risks in the                implementation           Committee has            with international
 context of a                of supervision           reviewed and             standards.
 highly dollarized           over the group of        addressed risks,
 economy                     banks and financial      such as operational   · Ensure the agenda
                             conglomerates            risks, with the aim      of the Financial
                             operating in             of moving toward         Sector Regulators
                             Cambodia; and            adoption of the          Committee is
                       (iv) promote consumer          Basel II solvency        aligned with
                             protection for           framework.               the agenda
                             banking operations                                of the ASEAN
                             and other financial   · Consider                  regional financial
                             products                 implementing             integration.
                             and services.            the revised capital
                                                      accord based on                                NBC, MEF,
                    · Create an interministerial      market risks.                                     SECC
                       task force to consider
                       establishing a Financial    · Effectively
                       Sector Regulators              implement and
                       Committee (bank,               monitor the National
                       securities market,             Crisis Management
                       and insurance)                 Framework
                       aimed at supporting            based on market
                       effective supervision          developments and
                       and convergence                new risks.
                       with regional and
                       international standards.

                    · Identify the legal
                       aspects, policies,
                       procedures, cooperation
                       arrangements,
                       fiscal implications, etc.
                       for formulating a national
                       crisis management
                       framework based

                                                                            continued on next page
54 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

Table continued

Development                   SHORT-TERM                  MEDIuM-TERM            LONG-TERM             Agencies
Policy Area                Target 2011­2014             Target 2014­2017     Target 2017­2020         Concerned
Organization of
a framework for         on experiences of             · E stablishcrisis     · Designandperform       NBC, MEF,
cooperation, early      other countries.                 management             stress-testing           SECC
identification, and                                      framework and          exercises based on
crisis management    · Formulate a national crisis       procedures based       increasingly complex
                        management framework             on lessons learned     crisis scenarios
                        that is primarily focused on     from the past          (the collapse of
                                                         crisis situations      an individual
                         (i) lender of last resort       and assessment         establishment,
                              facility and securing      of effectiveness       group of
                              fiscal support in the      of cooperation.        establishments, and
                              context of a high                                 systemic multisector
                              level of dollarization  · C ontinuously           establishments).
                              of the economy and         enhance
                              capital movements,         cooperation and     · Developcapacity,
                                                         preparedness among     preparedness, and
                         (ii) strengthening              the authorities        responsiveness
                              prompt corrective          involved.              systems.
                              action frameworks,
                                                      · S tartimplementing
                        (iii) designing and              stress-testing
                              establishing an early      exercises with the
                              warning system             aim of
                              among authorities          assessing
                              involved, and              effectiveness
                                                         of cooperation.
                        (iv) preparing

                              contingency plans

                              and communication

                              strategies.

                     · Setupinterministerial
                        working group to
                        formulate internal
                        cooperation, take
                        measures to implement
                        an early warning system,
                        and coordinate crisis
                        management including
                        the possibility for fiscal
                        support and other sources
                        of non-inflationary
                        finance for dealing
                        with crises.

                     · Establishformalcrisis
                        cooperation framework
                        among authorities.

                     · O rganizeinformation
                        sharing and early
                        identification signals of
                        potential crisis situations.

                                                                             continued on next page
                    Action Plan for Financial Sector Development 2011­2020 55

Table continued              SHORT-TERM             MEDIuM-TERM                   LONG-TERM            Agencies
 Development              Target 2011­2014         Target 2014­2017           Target 2017­2020        Concerned
 Policy Area
 Crisis prevention  · Identifylegaland             · F ocusattentionon        · R eviewthecrisis      NBC, MEF,
 and management        regulatory issues that         banks and financial        management              SECC
 framework             require improvement            institutions with          framework for
 for banks             to support the financial       high systemic risks        improvement in line
 and financial         sector regulators'             to the financial           with legal changes
 institutions          crisis prevention and          sector.                    and developments.
                       management framework.
 Maintenance                                       · Updatedatabase           · Iffeasible,identify
 of regular         · Documenttheprofile              on profile of licensed     a strategic partner
 surveillance          of licensed banks and          banks and financial        to support the
 of banks and          financial institutions for     institutions.              establishment of
 enforcement of        database development.                                     the deposit
 prudential norms                                  · Considerthe                 insurance system.
                    · F inalizethemanualfor           feasibility of
                       managing delinquent            establishing
                       and problem banks and          a deposit
                       financial institutions.        insurance system.

                    · Maintainregular              · Increasethenumber · Updatetheprofiles            NBC
                       surveillance of banks
                       and financial institutions  of supervision             of individual banks
                       and enforcement of
                       prudential norms            staff to match the         and financial
                       against noncompliant
                       establishments.             increasing                 institutions.

                    · Introducerisk-based          number of licensed         · Maintainregular
                       supervision and improve     banks and financial           surveillance of
                       the quality of data         institutions.                 banks and financial
                       received from licensed
                       banks and financial         · Completefulfillment institutions
                       institutions through
                       supervision.                of Basel I Core            and enforce

                    · Makethecreditbureau          Principles for             prudential norms
                       operational under an
                       adequate legal and          Effective                  for noncompliant
                       regulatory framework.
                                                   Bank Supervision.          establishments.

                                                   · Establishsupervisory
                                                      cooperation
                                                      memorandums of
                                                      understanding with
                                                      each country that
                                                      has banks licensed in
                                                      Cambodia.

                                                   · E nhancesupervisory
                                                      practices to keep
                                                      pace with the
                                                      development of
                                                      deposit-taking MFIs.

                                                   · Maintainregular
                                                      surveillance of
                                                      banks and financial
                                                      institutions
                                                      and enforce
                                                      prudential norms
                                                      for noncompliant
                                                      establishments.

                                                                                             continued on next page
56 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

Table continued             SHORT-TERM                  MEDIuM-TERM                  LONG-TERM            Agencies
                         Target 2011­2014             Target 2014­2017           Target 2017­2020        Concerned
 Development
 Policy Area       Promote the use of the           Strengthen further use     Review preparedness       NBC, MEF,
 Consistent        riel in economic and             of the riel:               for conducting                SECC
 promotion of      financial transactions:                                     more independent
 the use of the                                     · Enhancethe               monetary policy:
 Cambodian riel    · E stablishajointworking           capacity to monitor
 with the aim         group to study the               market development      · P erforma
 of achieving         strategy for promoting           to ensure that new         comprehensive
 the long-term        the use of the riel.             transactions, new          assessment on
 objective of the                                      instruments, or            tools, market
 government on     · Providethemeansto                 development of             developments,
 de-dollarization     review the legal and             over-the-counter           accomplishments,
 and more             regulatory framework on          transactions are           and progress vs. the
 independence in      areas to support the role        not jeopardizing           overall long-term
 monetary policy      of the riel as legal tender.     efforts to intensify       objective for
 formulation                                           use of the riel for        de-dollarization
                   · E stablishajoint                  large financial            in order to
                      working group aimed at           transactions.
                      assessing new markets,                                      (i) assess the
                      new transactions,             · D esignand                        readiness of
                      and new instruments              implement an                     NBC (notably
                      with regard to risks             action plan aimed                in terms of
                      involved concerning the          at issuing measures              capacity,
                      achievement of the long-         and requirements                 statistical
                      term objective.                  related to the use of            dashboard,
                                                       the riel for financial           and available
                   · Identifyandassess                 and economic                     policy-making
                      policy-making decisions          transactions.                    tools) to carry
                      and measures to further                                           out more
                      promote the use of            · P eriodicallyreassess             independent
                      the riel.                        appropriateness                  monetary
                                                       and accuracy of                  policy; and
                   · Ensurethatthevolume               statistical
                      of the riel in circulation       dashboard necessary        (ii) determine and
                      meets the requirements           to support NBC's                 pursue further
                      of consumers.                    decisions on the                 implementa-
                                                       formulation of                   tion of short-
                   · Developthecapacity                monetary policy and              and medium-
                      of technical staff               foreign exchange.                term policy
                      and strengthen the                                                targets with
                      capability to monitor         · Performperiodic                   existing tools.
                      the economy with the             analytical studies on
                      establishment of an              the economy and
                      appropriate and accurate         consider policy-
                      statistical dashboard to         making decisions
                      conduct monetary policy          (within the range
                      effectively.                     of available tools)
                                                       or the effectiveness
                                                       of policy-making
                                                       decisions set forth
                                                       by the monetary
                                                       authority.

                                                                               continued on next page
                                               Action Plan for Financial Sector Development 2011­2020 57

Table continued     SHORT-TERM                    MEDIuM-TERM                LONG-TERM      Agencies
                 Target 2011­2014                Target 2014­2017        Target 2017­2020  Concerned
 Development
 Policy Area     Establish a money market Monitor and                                      NBC, MEF,
 Operations of                                                                                 SECC
 a domestic      based on collateral:            strengthen money
 money market
                 · L aunchNCDs                   market operations:

                 together with support           · Strengthen

                 infrastructure to develop       monitoring and

                 an interbank market.            surveillance

                 · O rganizepublicworkshops      mechanisms to
                    to explain and encourage     effectively regulate
                    the commencement of an       and supervise
                    interbank market using       operations of
                    the NCDs.                    financial institutions
                                                 engaged in money
                 · S etupajointworking           market operations.
                    group to study the

                 establishment of a

                 money market.

                 · Ensureanappropriate
                    legal and regulatory
                    framework is in place to
                    facilitate the operation
                    of eligible institutions
                    (including nonbank
                    financial institutions) to
                    undertake money market
                    operations and issue
                    other types of investment
                    securities denominated in
                    riel in the money market
                    (commercial papers, bills
                    of exchange, etc.) as the
                    use of the riel in domestic
                    transactions increases.

                 · P rescribeformsand
                    documentation to be
                    used. Specify penalties
                    for violations, including
                    the revocation of
                    licenses, sanctions, and
                    cease actions.

                 · Establishanaccounting
                    system, standards,
                    and procedures
                    covering money
                    market transactions,
                    including the definition
                    of a standard chart of
                    accounts and treatment
                    of money market
                    transactions, including
                    off-balance sheet items.

                                                                         continued on next page
58 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

Table continued                SHORT-TERM                  MEDIuM-TERM                LONG-TERM              Agencies
 Development                Target 2011­2014             Target 2014­2017         Target 2017­2020          Concerned
 Policy Area
                      · S etupreporting                · A ssesstheaccuracy       · Reassessthe             MEF, NBC,
 Financial stability     requirements for money           and effectiveness          effectiveness of          SECC
                         market operators on              of financial stability     the monitoring of
                         capital adequacy, volume         indicators used for        financial stability
                         of operations, risk              the monitoring             and cooperation
                         exposures on securities          processes.                 among authorities
                         trading (repurchase                                         in charge of the
                         agreements, promissory        · W hererequired,             supervision of
                         notes, etc.), level of           define and                 banks, markets, and
                         contingent liabilities,          implement an action        the financial sector.
                         off-balance sheet                plan to enhance
                         transactions, and liquidity      the effectiveness of
                         ratios, among others.            monitoring financial
                                                          stability and early
                      · SetupaunitwithinNBC               warning systems.
                         to oversee money market
                         operations of eligible
                         financial institutions.

                      · Establishafinancial
                         stability monitoring unit
                         within NBC, identify major
                         risks embedded in the
                         banking system itself,
                         and potential shocks
                         that could arise from
                         adverse developments
                         in the economy. Intensify
                         training and capacity-
                         building efforts for
                         the unit.

                      · O rganizeperiodicstudies
                         on financial stability, risk
                         vectors identification,
                         and potential impact.
                         Issue alerts to relevant
                         authorities and act as
                         an early warning system
                         to complement and
                         support risk-based
                         supervision by the
                         banking supervision
                         authority.

                      · S etupajointworking
                         group to study the
                         establishment of a
                         national financial
                         stability committee.

                                                                                  continued on next page
                      Action Plan for Financial Sector Development 2011­2020 59

Table continued

Development                    SHORT-TERM                MEDIuM-TERM               LONG-TERM           Agencies
Policy Area                 Target 2011­2014           Target 2014­2017        Target 2017­2020       Concerned
Establishment
of an effective       · Conduct an assessment        · Update achievements                                NBC
wholesale foreign        of the organization            annually, develop
exchange (FX)            and operations of the          related regulations,   · Conduct              NBC
market (excluding        FX market aimed at an          and assess resource       comprehensive       NBC
derivative trading)      appropriate action             and capacity-building     assessment of
and modalities of        plan for organizing            needs.                    the progress on
NBC intervention         and establishing an                                      application of the
                         effective electronic FX     · Enhance capacity           BCP to banks and
Development of a         wholesale market.              building to exercise      MFIs. Review and
strategic plan to                                       professional              update further
help achieve full     · Establish a road map or         judgment and              actions required.
compliance with          action plan to support         to perform
the Basel Core           the establishment of           comprehensive
Principles (BCP) for     effective operations of        risk-profile
Effective Banking        the FX wholesale market        assessments (for
Supervision and          over a 3-year transitional     each of the risks
appropriate              period; thereafter,            addressed under the
regulations              transaction payments           BCP 25 principles).
Effective                in the Cambodian
implementation           securities market will
of risk-based            be settled in riel.
supervision
                      · Establish a 5-year action
                         plan needed to achieve
                         compliance with BCP 25
                         and to keep pace with
                         market developments.
                         Actions required should
                         be organized into projects
                         with project managers
                         and management
                         teams established to
                         implement the plan.

                      · Effective implementation
                         of existing regulations
                         aimed at supporting risk-
                         based supervision.

                      · Formulate supervisory
                         core knowledge files to
                         provide the information
                         or data needed to support
                         the new approach.

                      · Establish an effective
                         framework for
                         cooperation with the
                         financial stability
                         unit to complement
                         and support risk-based
                         assessments and
                         identify vulnerabilities.

                                                                               continued on next page
60 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

Table continued     SHORT-TERM                  MEDIuM-TERM                  LONG-TERM      Agencies
 Development     Target 2011­2014              Target 2014­2017          Target 2017­2020  Concerned
 Policy Area
 upgrading                                     · Assessthe                                     NBC
 of regulatory                                    existing regulatory
 framework                                        framework and
                                                  identify necessary
 Cooperation                                      amendments or
 framework                                        revisions and new
 with domestic                                    regulations to
 regulatory                                       ensure compliance
 authorities                                      with international
                                                  principles or to
 International                                    improve overall
 cooperation                                      effectiveness of
 framework                                        banking supervision.

                 · F inalizethecooperation · Ensurethe                                     NBC, MEF,
                                                                                              SECC
                 framework with domestic cooperation
                                                                                              NBC
                 regulatory authorities.       framework is

                 · Worktowardfinalizingan      implemented
                    MOU with the SECC and      effectively.

                 the insurance regulator,

                 including the cooperation

                 to monitor financial

                 stability processes for

                 crisis preparedness.

                 · Continueeffortsto           · D esignandfinalize
                    finalize cooperation          an internal policy
                    frameworks with foreign       for implementing
                    supervisory authorities       the cooperation
                    involved in home and          between home and
                    host supervision over         host supervisors
                    operational activities        (e.g., joint
                    of banks operating in         supervision, regular
                    Cambodia.                     formal information
                                                  exchange, informal
                 · C onsiderthepossibility        data exchanges,
                    of increasing cooperation     establishing and
                    with ASEAN banking            updating the
                    supervisors for               core supervisory
                    technical assistance.         knowledge files etc.)

                                               · C onsistently
                                                  implement the
                                                  home and host
                                                  cooperation policy
                                                  among supervisors
                                                  and periodically
                                                  reassess its
                                                  effectiveness.

                                                                         continued on next page
                   Action Plan for Financial Sector Development 2011­2020 61

Table continued

Development                 SHORT-TERM               MEDIuM-TERM          LONG-TERM      Agencies
Policy Area              Target 2011­2014           Target 2014­2017  Target 2017­2020  Concerned
Early warning
system (EWS),      · Supplementandestablish                                                 NBC
prompt corrective     a more comprehensive
actions, and          and effective EWS
measures for          (liquidity, market,
tackling weak         management, operational
banks                 risks, etc.) with forward-
                      looking risk indicators
                      such as standardized
                      stress-testing measures
                      or indicators.

                   · C onsideralertstobe
                      issued by the financial
                      stability monitoring
                      unit with regard to
                      risk concentrations.

                   · P romptcorrective
                      actions (PCA):

                      (i) Revise and upgrade
                           the PCA policies in
                           light of the risks
                           identified through
                           the EWS.

                   · M easuresfortackling
                      weak or problem banks:

                      (i) Define weak and
                           problem banks based
                           on fit and proper
                           criteria. Ensure
                           consistency of criteria
                           and definitions when
                           drafting the rules and
                           policy.

                      (ii) Determine the steps
                           to be taken when
                           identifying or coping
                           with potential
                           or actual crisis
                           situations (triggers
                           for activating the
                           crisis management
                           framework).

                      (iii) Draft and adopt
                           problem banks policy
                           within the relevant
                           legal framework.

ASEAN = Association of Southeast Asian Nations, MEF = Ministry of Economy and Finance, MFI = microfinance institution,
MOU = memorandum of understanding, NBC = National Bank of Cambodia, NCD = negotiable certificates of deposit,
SECC = Securities and Exchange Commission of Cambodia.
62 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

Anti­Money Laundering and
Combating the Financing of Terrorism

Key Accomplishments:
     · T he Law on Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism
         (AML/CFT) was passed in 2007 and supported the passage of various laws critical
         to AML and CFT operations, including the Law on Counter-Terrorism, the Criminal
         Procedure Code, and the Law on Anti-Corruption.

     · TheCambodianFinancialIntelligenceUnitwasestablishedin2008.

     · Theprakas on AML/CFT was introduced for banks' implementation.

     · Theprakas on AML/CFT was introduced to reporting entities not regulated by the
         National Bank of Cambodia for implementation.

     · CambodiagainedmembershipintheAsia/PacificGrouponMoneyLaundering.

Future Reforms:

Development           SHORT-TERM              MEDIuM-TERM                  LONG-TERM       Agencies
Policy Area        Target 2011­2014          Target 2014­2017          Target 2017­2020   Concerned
Compliance with
Financial Action   · Based on the mutual · Conduct risk-based        · Continue           NBC, MEF,
Task Force (FATF)                                                       institutional         SECC
recommendations    evaluation report,        supervision of             oversight on
and AML and CFT                                                         risk-related AML
supervision        continue to meet          reporting entities on      and CFT.

                   compliance with           AML and CFT.            · Strengthen
                                                                        regional and
                   applicable FATF 40+9 · Undertake mutual              international
                   recommendations.                                     cooperation.
                                             evaluation on AML

                   · Undertake risk          and CFT to fully

                   assessment of             comply with FATF

                   NBC-supervised            recommendations.

                      institutions and of    · Monitor
                      securities firms on       compliance of all
                      activities related to     reporting entities.
                      AML and CFT.
                                             · Strengthen
                   · Conduct awareness          coordination with
                      raising on AML            other national
                      and CFT among             regulators.
                      casinos, nonprofit

                   organizations,

                   and realtors.

                   · Apply for
                      membership in
                      Egmont Group.

                   · Consider amending
                      the law on AML and
                      CFT to include
                      SECC in the Board
                      of CAFIU.

AML = anti­money laundering, CAFIU = Cambodian Financial Intelligence Unit, CFT = combating the financing of terrorism,
MEF = Ministry of Economy and Finance, NBC = National Bank of Cambodia, SECC = Securities and Exchange Commission
of Cambodia.
                                                   Action Plan for Financial Sector Development 2011­2020 63

Microfinance

Key Accomplishments:
     · Createdaforumforpolicycoordination.

     · E stablished a supervision system for licensed microfinance institutions (L-MFIs)
         consistent with the overall framework for the banking industry.

     · IntroducedappropriateprudentialnormsforL-MFIs.

     · Facilitated the transformation of a number of nongovernment organizations
         into L-MFIs.

     · P romoteddepositsandmicrocreditthroughL-MFIs.

     · StrengthenedthecapacityoftheNationalBankofCambodia's(NBC)Microfinance
         Supervision Division to supervise the rural finance and microfinance industry.

     · Providedsupportfortheestablishmentoflicensedmicrofinancedepositinstitutions
         (L-MDIs).

     · Extendedprotection to the savings of the poor (prudential measures for L-MFIs
         and L-MDIs).

     · H elpedestablishandextendedsupporttotheCambodiaMicrofinanceAssociation.

     · C onductedastudyoninformalcreditserviceproviders.

     · C onductedastudyonsavingshabitsandexpectations.

     · UpgradedthequalityofcoursesonmicrofinanceattheCenterforBankingStudies.

     · N BCstartedthedevelopmentofacreditinformationsystemandhelpedestablish
         a credit bureau.

     · Issued21prudentialregulationsonMFIoperations(from2001to2009).

     · MEFissuedprakas No. 028 SHV.PrK on 12 January 2010 on Licensing of a Pawn
         Business, Buying and Selling of Pawned Pledges, and Transfer of Titles, and promoted
         public awareness of the licensing of pawn businesses.

Future Reforms:

Development              SHORT-TERM                 MEDIuM-TERM                  LONG-TERM             Agencies
Policy Area           Target 2011­2014             Target 2014­2017          Target 2017­2020         Concerned
Strong regulatory
and supervisory       · C onductassessment         · C ontinuetodevelop      · Conductsupervisory         NBC
framework                of compliance                NBC's strategy            review to cover all
                         with the Bank                for on-site and           MFIs. Target for
Self-assessment          for International            off-site supervision      on-site supervision
of the effectiveness     Settlements-Basel            over MFIs.                is one visit every
of MFIs' regulatory      Committee on                                           12­24 months,
framework and            Banking Supervision       · Implementaction            depending on MFIs'
supervisory              (BIS-BCBS) on                plan aimed at             risk profiles.
processes                Microfinance                 achieving compliance
                         Activities and Core          with BIS-BCBS          · Priorityshouldbe
                         Principles for Effective     Core Principles for       given to deposit-
                         Banking Supervision.         Effective Supervision     taking MFIs with the
                                                      of Microfinance           aim of promoting
                      · Defineactionplanto            Activities.               international best
                         achieve compliance                                     practices (corporate
                         with the BIS-BCBS         · R eviewthe                 governance,
                         Core Principles for          progress toward           disclosure, risk
                         Effective Supervision        the adoption              management,
                         of Microfinance              of a risk-based           monitoring, and
                         Activities.                  supervisory               internal audit).
                                                      approach.

                                                                             continued on next page
64 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

Table continued         SHORT-TERM             MEDIuM-TERM                LONG-TERM              Agencies
                     Target 2011­2014         Target 2014­2017        Target 2017­2020          Concerned
  Development                                                                                   NBC, MEF
  Policy Area        · Self-assesscompliance · Implementaplanfor · Improveservices
 Assessment of
 appropriateness     with the BIS-BCBS on bringing unregistered (registration, training,
 of applicable
 regulatory          Microfinance Activities or informal financial extension services,
 framework and
 licensing criteria  and Core Principles      institutions into the   etc.) and provide

                     for Effective Banking formal system.             other incentives that

                     Supervision. Assess      · Undertakepublic       will attract those
                     appropriateness of          awareness programs   operating in the
                     applicable framework        to enhance the       informal sector
                     and licensing criteria      implementation       to join the
                     as follows:                 of the prakas        formal sector.

                     (i) bring the            on financial            · ExpandarrayofMFI

                     informal sector communities.                     services under an

                     into the formal · B asedonassessments appropriate legal and
                     sector,                                          regulatory framework.
                                              performed, identify
                     (ii) reassess financial areas that need
                     conditions and                                   · Ensurethatnew

                     operations of            to be addressed         products and

                     deposit-taking           and improve the         services offered are

                     MFIs with the            applicable licensing    adequately supervised

                                              criteria and regulatory by authorities and,
                     aim of identifying framework.
                           possible                                   where and when
                           weaknesses for
                           improvement,       · Presentthemeans       necessary, take
                           and                   for promoting the    appropriate measures
                     (iii) scale up              development and      to adjust supervisory
                           products and          growth of products   processes.
                           services offered      and services being
                           by MFIs to their      offered by MFIs.
                           customers.
                                              · A mendandexpand
                                                 MFI authority
                                                 under the legal and

                                              regulatory framework

                                              to allow MFIs to offer

                                              additional services

                                              and products.

Common reporting     · Reviewthepresent       · Studythefeasibilityof · S tudythefeasibility    NBC
standard                reporting system of
                        MFIs and standardize  providing MFIs with     of MFI common
                        it by using a risk-
                        based approach,       the same reporting      reporting standards
                        when appropriate.
                                              standards as banks.     to follow IFRS where

                                              · G ivepriorityto       applicable.

                                              deposit-taking MFIs

                                              for convergence

                                              with bank reporting

                                              requirements.

Training for         · C onducttraining       · Continuecapacity      · MEFtowork               MEF
financial                                                                with regional
policy makers        needs assessment of building of MFI                 and international
                                                                         organizations for
                     MEF officials focusing division staff of MEF        policy support and
                                                                         capacity building for
                     on understanding         based on training          the MFI sector.

                     of MFIs.                 needs assessment.

                     · D evelopaplanfor
                        improving capacity
                        building of MFI
                        division staff.

                                                                                          continued on next page
                                               Action Plan for Financial Sector Development 2011­2020 65

Table continued

Development             SHORT-TERM                   MEDIuM-TERM                 LONG-TERM             Agencies
Policy Area          Target 2011­2014              Target 2014­2017          Target 2017­2020         Concerned

Increase in          · Identifyfunding         · Continueto              · Continue                   MEF, NBC,
efficiency and                                    introduce MFI MIS         standardization               CMA
                     to support the               that integrate the        of MIS of MFIs.
lowering of costs of procurement of an            programs for loan                                  Lead agency:
MFI management                                    and accounting                                          MEF
information          appropriate MFI MIS          tracking system to
                                                  all MFIs.
systems (MIS)        that integrates the

                     programs for loan

                     and accounting

                     tracking.

                     · Providetechnical
                        assistance to small
                        MFIs to provide
                        solutions to their
                        MIS needs.

Provision of access  Review the status of the Develop schemes to         Develop policies              MEF, NBC
to wholesale funds
for MFIs             present initiatives to    improve access by         for providing access        Lead agency:
                                                                                                          MEF
                     provide wholesale loan MFIs to commercial           to wholesale funds

                     funds for MFI operations bank local currency        for MFIs:

                     and explore ways to       funds and extend          · Considerpoliciesthat
                                                                            will facilitate support
                     provide wholesale funds policy support:                by the financial sector

                     to MFIs:                  · Developapproaches

                     · Reportthestatus         and mechanisms            to provide funds

                     of the role of            to assist MFI access      for the increasing

                     RDB in financing          to riel funds for         activities of MFIs.

                     MFIs and make             loan financing from

                     recommendations           the commercial

                     based on findings.        banking sector, such

                     · R eportthestatusof      as through credit
                        ongoing schemes        guarantee schemes.

                     with commercial           · E stablishpoliciesthat

                     banks and make            will facilitate local

                     recommendations           currency lending.

                     on how to move

                     forward.

                     · P resentthemeansto
                        facilitate MFI access
                        to local currency to
                        better meet the needs
                        of their customers.

Permission for MFIs Enhance savings            Present the means for Extend support to                MEF, NBC,
to expand direct mobilization by MDIs: promoting savings:                                                 CMA
access to savings · Reviewbarriersto · M DIsshouldbe                     MDIs and other savings
                                                                                                     Lead agency:
                                                                         organizations:                   NBC

                     savings mobilization. assisted to promote · C ontinueassisting

                     · Studyhowto              innovative schemes        MDIs and savings-led
                        accelerate the         that will enhance         NGOs.
                        establishment of       savings generation
                        more MDIs consistent   from the general
                        with supervisory       public.

                     capacity.                 · S tudywaysbywhich

                                               savings-led NGOs can

                                               be made strong, safe

                                               savings generators.

                                                                                               continued on next page
66 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

Table continued

Development             SHORT-TERM             MEDIuM-TERM                  LONG-TERM                Agencies
Policy Area          Target 2011­2014         Target 2014­2017          Target 2017­2020            Concerned

Increase in financial Consider ways to        Develop programs          Expand financial services   NBC, CMA
inclusion                                                                                          Lead agency:
                     encourage people living or provide incentives to the rural poor and
                                                                                                        NBC
Deepening of         in hard-to-reach areas that help the poor and individuals in hard-to-
                                                                        reach areas:
                     to access bank services: individuals in hard-
financial services · Studytheneedsfor to-reach areas access · T racktheprogressof
                                              financial services:       and scale up services
Expansion of            supply and demand                               to the poor, people
access to financial     of microfinance       · Considerfiscalor        in hard-to-reach
products and            among the most poor      regulatory incentives  areas, and individuals
services to             and people in hard-      for MFIs to expand     who were formerly
individuals in          to-reach areas.          operations to the      excluded from
hard-to-reach-areas                              most poor and people   microfinance services.
(particularly the    · Basedontheabove           in hard-to-reach
poor and the            study, identify          areas.
most poor)              constraints to
                        reaching these        · D esignand
                        clients and provide      implement programs

                     recommendations          that will promote

                     to address these         access to a range

                     issues through           of financial services

                     both financial and       (microleasing,

                     nonfinancial services. microcredit, and

                     · L inkthestrategyto     microsavings) by the
                        financial education   most poor to enable
                        and business          them to improve
                        development training  their welfare.

                     strategies set forth in · Encouragelinkage

                     the strategy.            of microfinance

                                              operations of MFIs

                                              to NGOs and local

                                              governments in a

                                              prudent manner.

                                              · R eplicatesuccessful
                                                 pilots in other
                                                 hard-to-reach areas.

Strengthening of     Review the development Develop a policy            Establish government        MEF, NBC,
competitiveness in                                                                                      CMA
the MFI sector       of the microfinance      framework and package policies and
                                                                                                   Lead agency:
                     sector, map the          of assistance to enhance development assistance           MEF

                     microfinance sector      operations of the MFI designed to enhance

                     in the country, fill     sector:                   the operations of

                     knowledge gaps, and · B asedontheresults the sector:
                     review lessons learned: of the study, review · D evelopMFIpolicies

                     · Conductasector-        the development           to accelerate sector

                     wide study of            of policies for the       development and

                     microfinance in          microfinance sector       improve efficiency

                     Cambodia focusing        and expand the            of sector operations

                     on impact assessment development of                based on the results

                     and disseminate the assistance. Determine of the study.

                     results of the study to  effectiveness of          · Promotepublicand
                     various stakeholders.    past policies and            private interest to
                                              assistance extended          support microfinance
                                              to the sector.               development.

                                                                                            continued on next page
                                                Action Plan for Financial Sector Development 2011­2020 67

Table continued         SHORT-TERM               MEDIuM-TERM                 LONG-TERM               Agencies
  Development        Target 2011­2014           Target 2014­2017         Target 2017­2020           Concerned
  Policy Area
 Strong consumer     · Designacommon · Implementthe                      · Improvethe               MEF, NBC,
 protection                                                                                             CMA
 MFI consumer        framework to guide         guidelines for MFI       guidelines for
 protection and                                                                                    Lead agency:
 financial literacy  disclosures of loan        consumer protection. consumer protection                NBC

 Reliable and        terms and conditions       · Implementthe              based on experience
 accurate            and other relevant            program for              and best practices.
 information         matters that will             promoting financial
                     protect consumers.            literacy.             · Promoteoffering
 Redress of                                                                 financial literacy to
 grievances
                     · D esignaprogramfor                                other sectors.

                     promoting financial

                     literacy not only for

                     the present clients of

                     MFIs, but also for the

                     most poor in both

                     urban and rural areas.

                     · S tudytheissueof
                        over-indebtedness.

                     · D isseminatethe
                        results of the study
                        to various
                        stakeholders and map
                        a strategy and a plan
                        to further address the
                        study's findings.

                     · Establisha               · M onitororcontrolthe · Assesstheprogress           MEF, NBC
                        credit bureau.
                                                process of assessing     achieved and              Lead agency:
                     · W iththe                                                                         NBC
                        implementation          customers' solvency      the gaps to be
                        of risk-based
                        supervision, ensure     and creditworthiness     filled and, where
                        that data accuracy
                        becomes a key           for decision-making      applicable, define
                        concern of the
                        supervisory processes   purposes.                an appropriate
                        and that the reports
                        accurately reflect the  · Steadilypromote        action plan to
                        MFIs' operations and       the adoption of       enhance reliability
                        their risk profiles.       best accounting and   and accuracy of
                                                   financial disclosure  information and
                                                   practices with the    data disclosed and of
                                                   aim of converging     supervisory reports.

                                                with the standards

                                                applicable to the

                                                banking sector.

                     · E stablisha              · Monitoreffectiveness · S trengthenthe             MEF, NBC,
                        mechanism for                                                                   CMA
                        redress of grievances   and make necessary       mechanism for
                        for MFIs. Consider                                                         Lead agency:
                        establishment of a      improvements in          addressing client              MEF
                        consumer protection
                        agency to receive,      the mechanism for        grievances.
                        follow up, and act
                        on complaints.          addressing client

                                                grievances.

                                                                                            continued on next page
68 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

Table continued       SHORT-TERM              MEDIuM-TERM                      LONG-TERM            Agencies
                   Target 2011­2014          Target 2014­2017              Target 2017­2020        Concerned
  Development
  Policy Area      · C MAtogetguidance · CMAtoplaya                     · CMAtoactas               MEF, NBC,
 Support for CMA                                                           an umbrella                 CMA
 development       from NBC and MEF          more active role              organization for
                                                                           the MFI sector         Lead agency:
                   in terms of training      in microfinance               including associated        CMA
                                                                           organizations.
                   on relevant topics        development.

                   (taxation, compliance · CMAtoexpand
                   with anti­money
                                             membership until it
                   laundering, etc.)
                                             covers the entire
                   to develop its
                                             MFI sector.
                   capacity to be an

                   effective partner

                   in microfinance

                   development.

Training for MFIs  · CMAtoconduct            · Expandtraining           · Implementthe             MEF, NBC,
                                                                                                       CMA
                   a training needs          by the Center for          decision on the
                                                                                                  Lead agency:
                   assessment to             Banking Studies and establishment of                      MEF

                   determine actual          CMA and expand the microfinance training

                   training needs in the coverage to MFI staff facilities.

                   microfinance sector, based on the results            · Cambodia's
                                                                           microfinance training
                   in coordination           of training needs             facilities to network
                                                                           with regional/
                   and support of key        assessment.

                   government agencies. · Makedecisionon

                   · Developaplanfor         the establishment          international

                   developing the            of MFI training            training/learning

                   capacity of the           facilities (whether the resource centers.

                   MFI sector and of         existing stand-alone

                   policy or regulatory      training facilities are

                   agencies.                 appropriate or there is

                                             need for a centralized

                                             MFI training facility).

Licensing of a Pawn Bring pawn businesses    Strengthen the             Introduce and             MEF
Business, Buying into the formal sector:     regulations and            implement an IT system
and Selling of                               supervision of pawn        for pawn business
Pawned Pledges,    · Tobeconsistent          businesses:                operation.

                   with other laws
and Transfer of Title and regulations,
                                             · Issueother               · Fullimplementation

                   issue guidelines          regulations to             of the proposed IT

                   to implement the          implement the Law          system through a

                   prakas on Licensing       on Licensing of            training program for

                   of a Pawn Business,       a Pawn Business,           the regulator, market

                   Buying and Selling of     Buying and Selling of operators, and

                   Pawned Pledges, and       Pawned Pledges, and concerned authorities.

                   Transfer of Title.        Transfer of Title.         · Improvetheefficiency

                   · Strengthenthe           · Increasepublic           of market control
                      enforcement of the
                      prakas on Licensing    awareness by               over the pawn
                      of a Pawn Business,
                      Buying and Selling of  organizing workshops industry through the
                      Pawned Pledges, and
                      Transfer of Title.     and training courses. use of an IT network

                                             · Introducecomputer-       for monitoring market
                                                based operation for     operations.

                                             the pawn industry. · Increasepawnmarket

                   · Strengthenthe           · Strengthenand            transparency and the
                                                enforce the law and     level of consumer
                      enforcement of the        related regulations on  protection
                      prakas by taking

                                                                                           continued on next page
                                              Action Plan for Financial Sector Development 2011­2020 69

Table continued         SHORT-TERM              MEDIuM-TERM               LONG-TERM      Agencies
  Development        Target 2011­2014          Target 2014­2017       Target 2017­2020  Concerned
  Policy Area
                    into account market       licensing of a pawn    by eliminating
                    reactions and             business and buying    suspicious pawned
                    developments.             and selling of pawned  items.
                                              pledges, and transfer
                 · Establish                  of title to ensure
                    interministerial working  the effectiveness of
                    group to bring pawn       operations.
                    businesses from the
                    informal sector to the
                    formal sector.

                 · A doptthelawon
                    licensing of a pawn
                    business and the
                    buying and selling of
                    pawned pledges, and
                    transfer of title.

                 · Establishan
                    association of pawn
                    businesses.

                 · Developa3-year
                    capacity building plan
                    for the regulator and
                    market operators.

CMA = Cambodia Microfinance Association, IFRS = International Financial Reporting Standards, IT = information technology,
MDI = microfinance deposit institution, MFI = microfinance institution, NBC = National Bank of Cambodia, NGO = nongovernment
organization, RDB = Rural Development Bank.
70 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

Leasing

Key Accomplishments:
     · T he Civil Code, which includes leasing, was passed in 2007 and is awaiting
         implementation.

     · T helawtoimplementtheCivilCodehasbeensubmittedtotheCouncilofMinisters
         and is in the discussion stage.

     · T he Law on Secured Transactions was passed in 2007 with provisions covering
         leasing.

     · TheSecuredTransactionRegistryattheMinistryofCommerceisfullyoperational.

     · TheLawonFinancialLeasingwaspassedin2009.

Future Reforms:

Development           SHORT-TERM               MEDIuM-TERM                    LONG-TERM             Agencies
Policy Area        Target 2011­2014           Target 2014­2017            Target 2017­2020         Concerned
Financial
leasing            · R eviewtheLawon · Introduceregulations · U tilizingtheoversight                   NBC

                   Financial Leasing,         and conduct                 of an inter ministerial

                   clarify and resolve        supervision of              policy committee,

                   conflicts with other       leasing operations.         review legal and

                   existing laws.                                         regulatory framework

                   · C oordinateproposed                                  to fill remaining gaps
                      amendments to                                       and ensure best
                      leasing and                                         practices in place.

                   related laws.

Implementation of  · Finalizetheprakas                                                               MEF, MOC,
regulations           concerning licensing                                                               MOJ,
Prudential            and regulating leasing
regulations           companies, tax                                                               MLMUPC, NBC
                      treatment of leases,
                      and accounting                                                                Lead agency:
                      treatments for                                                                     NBC
                      lessee and lessor,
                      among others.

                   · Establishprudential
                      regulations for
                      leasing operations.

Expansion of       · Expandthesecured         · Considerexpanding                                    MOC, MOJ,
secured transaction transaction registry         the secured transaction                           MLMUPC, NBC
registry                                         registry to include
                   to include lease              additional services,                               Lead agency:
                                                 such as fixtures.                                       MOC
                   transactions.

MEF = Ministry of Economy and Finance; MLMUPC = Ministry of Land Management, Urban Planning and Construction;
MOC = Ministry of Commerce; MOJ = Ministry of Justice; NBC = National Bank of Cambodia.
                                           Action Plan for Financial Sector Development 2011­2020 71

Insurance and Pensions

Insurance

Key Accomplishments:
     · Improvedsupervisionskillsoftheinsuranceregulator(off-siteandon-sitesupervision).
     · Engagedinregionalcooperationtoshareresourcesforinsurancedevelopment.
     · Issued and introduced some regulations on insurance such as the prakas on
         Accounting Guidelines for General Insurance Companies.
     · P reparedthenewLawonInsurance.
     · B ecameamemberoftheInternationalAssociationofInsuranceSupervisors.
     · E stablishedtheGeneralInsuranceAssociationofCambodia.
     · Establishedaninsurancepoolforsellingcross-bordervehicleinsurancepolicyin
         compliance with Protocol 5 on the Implementation of the Association of Southeast
         Asian Nations (ASEAN) Scheme for Compulsory Motor Vehicle Insurance under the
         ASEAN framework.
     · P ublishedanannualreportoninsuranceindustrydevelopmentinCambodia.

Future Reforms:     SHORT-TERM              MEDIuM-TERM               LONG-TERM              Agencies
                 Target 2011­2014          Target 2014­2017       Target 2017­2020          Concerned
 Development
 Policy Area     · AdoptthenewLaw · R eviewthestrategy · Reviewthestrategy                  MEF, NBC,
 Legal and                                                        for insurance sector          SECC
 regulatory      on Insurance.             for insurance sector
 framework                                                                                 Lead agency:
                 · R eviewtheexisting      development to align   development to                MEF
                    insurance regulations  with the level of      respond to the
                    and develop new ones   market developments.   level of market
                                                                  developments.
                 related to life insurance · R eviewinsurance
                                           regulations to align · Reviewinsurance
                 and microinsurance
                                                                  regulations to
                 after the adoption of with the level of
                                           market developments respond to the
                 the law.
                                                                  level of market
                 · Establishthe               and to comply       developments and
                    procedure for             with the IAIS Core  the core insurance
                    licensing life            Principles.         principles of IAIS.
                    insurance and
                                           · Reviewthesolvency

                 microinsurance            framework by taking

                 businesses.               into consideration

                 · Conductstudies          risk-based capital.

                 and analyze risk          · Reviewthemortality

                 associated with           table and its

                 life insurance to         appropriateness for

                 determine the ability, the market.

                 the process, and

                 solvency margin,

                 and help develop a

                 mortality table for

                 Cambodia.

                                                                                   continued on next page
72 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

Table continued              SHORT-TERM           MEDIuM-TERM                    LONG-TERM            Agencies
 Development             Target 2011­2014        Target 2014­2017            Target 2017­2020        Concerned
 Policy Area
                      · Developaccounting
                         guidelines for
                         life insurance.

                      · E stablishasupervisory
                         framework for
                         life insurance and
                         microinsurance.

                      · S etupinvestment
                         guidelines for
                         insurance companies.

                      · D evelopqualification
                         criteria for insurance
                         agents and brokers.

IAIS Core Principles  · C ontinuetoassess · R eviewthecurrent                · F ullycomplywith      MEF
                                                                                the Insurance Core
                      and determine the          practice of IAIS               Principles of IAIS.

                      gaps in the current        Core Principles

                      practice of IAIS Core in the insurance

                      Principles in the          market in Cambodia

                      Cambodian insurance through consultation

                      market.                    with IAIS experts

                                                 and commence

                                                 implementation.

Institutional         · Setuppolicyunit          · U pgradethe               · Establishan           MEF
framework                for preparing              Insurance Division          independent
                         an insurance               to the level of             insurance
                         development                Department of               commission.
                         policy, strategy, and      Insurance within
                         research.                  MEF with autonomy
                                                    and larger authority
                      · Setupdispute                to comply with
                         resolution office.         the Insurance Core
                                                    Principles of IAIS.
                      · F orman
                         interministerial        · C onsidersetting
                         working group              up a life insurance
                         on planning and            association.
                         coordination to
                         ensure consistency      · C onsidersettingup
                         between policy and         an insurance brokers
                         actions, achieve joint     association.
                         efforts, and minimize
                         risk of insurance       · C onsidersettingup
                         sector operations.         an insurance agents
                                                    association.

                                                 · S trengthentheroles
                                                    of the interministerial
                                                    working group
                                                    on planning and
                                                    coordination.

                                                                                             continued on next page
                                             Action Plan for Financial Sector Development 2011­2020 73

Table continued       SHORT-TERM              MEDIuM-TERM                    LONG-TERM            Agencies
                   Target 2011­2014          Target 2014­2017            Target 2017­2020        Concerned
 Development
 Policy Area       · Planandimplement · Continueto                       · Reviewthe             MEF, MLVT,
 Insurance market                                                                               MoSVY, NBC,
 mechanism         the campaign for          promote insurance.          effectiveness
                                                                                                     GIAC
                   awareness raising         · R eviewthe                of the program
                   on insurance                 progress of life         for promoting          Lead agency:
                   to help expand               insurance companies      insurance, and revise       MEF
                   market penetration.          and examine              if necessary.

                   · Reviewthe               their operations            · Assessplanning

                   interministerial          and introduce               needs for

                   working group             new products.               insurance promotion.

                   to strengthen the         · P repareaudit

                   implementation of         report on the

                   compulsory insurance implementation
                   for commercial motor of compulsory
                   vehicles, construction insurance.
                   sites, and passenger
                   transport.                · E nforcecompulsory
                                                insurance for all types
                   · C ooperatewith
                                             of vehicles.
                   GIAC to review the
                   insurance premium         · C ooperatewithNBC
                   for compulsory               to formulate the
                   insurance to ensure          policy and guidelines
                   market efficiency            on cross-sector
                   by comparing with            insurance operations.

                   the countries in

                   the region.

                   · C onsiderthe
                      possibility of
                      expanding
                      compulsory insurance
                      to all types of
                      vehicles.

                   · C ooperatewiththe
                      MLVT and MoSVY to
                      develop a coordinated
                      approach to workers
                      compensation
                      insurance and
                      health insurance.

                                                                                           continued on next page
74 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

Table continued        SHORT-TERM                MEDIuM-TERM                  LONG-TERM             Agencies
                    Target 2011­2014            Target 2014­2017          Target 2017­2020         Concerned
 Development
 Policy Area        · Developa                  · Reviewthecapacity- · C onducttrain-the-         MEF, MoEYS,
 Capacity building     performance-based                                                               GIAC
                       incentive system
                       for regulator staff      building program for trainer sessions on          Lead agency:
                       to ensure work                                                                  MEF
                       productivity             insurance regulator       insurance to ensure
                       and efficiency.
                                                staff and operators       the sustainability and
                    · D evelopand
                       implement a              at all levels.            development of the
                       capacity-building
                       plan for regulator       · Reviewthecapacity       insurance industry.
                       staff focusing on
                       specialized skills,      building plan for         · Extendthecapacity
                       including risk
                       assessment and           regulator staff.          of the insurance
                       actuarial expertise for
                       life insurance.          · Cooperatewith           institute to include
                                                   MoEYS to develop a     an insurance research
                    · C ooperatewith               syllabus on insurance  and development
                       GIAC to assess              at the tertiary        center that is
                       training needs for          education level.       recognized regionally.
                       insurance operators
                       and regulator            · Establishaninsurance · Cooperatewith
                       staff, and from this                               MoEYS to review the
                       assessment develop       institute to offer
                       training courses.        specialized training in tertiary education
                                                                          syllabus on insurance.
                    · Cooperatewith             insurance.
                       MoEYS to examine
                       the possibility of
                       developing a syllabus
                       on insurance at
                       the tertiary
                       education level.

                    · C ooperatewith
                       GIAC in organizing
                       a separate training
                       for insurance agents
                       to ensure insurance
                       services are offered
                       in compliance with
                       the required code
                       of professional
                       ethics and improve
                       consumer protection.

                                                                                            continued on next page
                                           Action Plan for Financial Sector Development 2011­2020 75

Table continued            SHORT-TERM       MEDIuM-TERM                   LONG-TERM        Agencies
                       Target 2011­2014    Target 2014­2017           Target 2017­2020    Concerned
 Development
 Policy Area        · DevelopanIT          · Developthebusiness · C ompleteinstallation       MEF
 Development of an     system to support
 early warning         the monitoring and  data for an IT             of a modernized IT
 system and IT         supervision of the
 system                insurance market.   system to support          system to respond

                                           the monitoring and         to the need for

                                           management of the          monitoring the

                                           risks of insurance         insurance market.

                                           companies.

                                           · S etupanearly
                                              warning system in
                                              the initial stage of
                                              implementation of
                                              the IT system.

                                           · O rganizetraining
                                              on the IT system for
                                              insurance regulator
                                              staff and operators in
                                              order to move toward
                                              a full implementation
                                              of the new IT system.

GIAC = General Insurance Association of Cambodia; IAIS = International Association of Insurance Supervisors; IT = information
technology; MEF = Ministry of Economy and Finance; MLVT = Ministry of Labor and Vocational Training; MoEYS = Ministry of
Education, Youth and Sports; MoSVY = Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation; NBC = National Bank of
Cambodia; SECC = Securities and Exchange Commission of Cambodia.
76 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

Pensions

Future Reforms:       SHORT-TERM                 MEDIuM-TERM                LONG-TERM              Agencies
                   Target 2011­2014             Target 2014­2017        Target 2017­2020          Concerned
Development
Policy Area        · R ecruitstaffandset · Implementthe                 · C ontinuetoimplement    MEF, MoSVY,
Common areas                                                                                      NSSF, NSSFC,
for each fund      up workplaces in the         second phase of the     capacity building to       NFV, PWDF

Feasibility study  capital, provincial          capacity-building       develop market and
for setting up
pension funds      cities, districts, and       plan to improve         requirements for

Capacity building  khans.                       skills required to run pension fund schemes.

                   · S tarttobuildcapacity pension schemes.             · Considernew

                   by organizing in-            · E stablishdatabases   data center for system

                   house training courses for all funds including security.

                   and external programs IT security.                   · UpdateITsystems

                   for acquiring specific · ImplementITsystems to meet the
                   skills such as trustee
                                                for all funds as        requirements of
                   skills, accounting,
                                                required.               the funds.
                   and administration

                   for investment

                   and businesses.

                   · O rganizeconsultative
                      workshops to
                      discuss the structure
                      and feasibility of
                      establishing the
                      pension scheme for
                      the private sector.

                   · D esignITsystems
                      required for all funds.

                   · Preparea                   · R eviewand            · Conductfinancial        NSSF
                      questionnaire for a          evaluate the            analysis.
                      survey on the daily          implementation of
                      expenditures of 2,000        the pension scheme.  · Extendthecoverage
                      workers.                                             to the whole country.

                   · Organizea
                      consultative workshop
                      to discuss the structure
                      and the feasibility of
                      setting up a pension
                      scheme.

                   · Formateamto
                      conduct pension
                      scheme research.

                   · Engageandorganize · Preparecapacity-               · Implementcapacity-      NSSF

                   training courses,            building plan.          building plan for

                   workshops, and               · C onductinternal      officers and staff.

                   study tours to               training on social

                   exchange experiences security scheme
                   domestically and
                                                for improving the
                   externally.
                                                capacity of NSSF's

                   · D ispatchNSSF'sofficers officers and staff.

                   to study data analyses · Recruitadditionalstaff.
                   on social security.

                                                                                             continued on next page
                                                   Action Plan for Financial Sector Development 2011­2020 77

Table continued

Development              SHORT-TERM                 MEDIuM-TERM                    LONG-TERM               Agencies
Policy Area           Target 2011­2014             Target 2014­2017            Target 2017­2020           Concerned
Preparation of legal
framework             · C ollaboratewith           · S etupinitial             · S etuplegal              NSSF
                         relevant ministries          investment rules for        framework and
IT system                and development              the funds.                  investment strategies.
development and          partner(s) to prepare
management               working procedure.                                    · Setupinvestment
                                                                                  committee.
Public information    · Conductactuarial
campaign                 study to determine                                    · C ollaboratewiththree
Institutional            benefits package and                                     institutions (NSSFC,
development and          contribution rate for                                    NFV, PWDF) to set up
capacity building        pension schemes.                                         long-term plan for
                                                                                  pension schemes.

                      · Organizeconsultative
                         workshops to prepare
                         legal framework.

                      · DevelopITsystem            · RegularupdateofIT         · R esearchand             NSSF
                         for possible interface       system and website.         fine-tune IT system.
                         with banking system.

                      · Setupfingerprint
                         and short messaging
                         service systems for
                         identifying members.

                      · D esignandinstall
                         the system for
                         pension schemes.

                      · S etupITnetworking
                         to link NSSF offices
                         with banks.

                                                   · Conductinformational                                 NSSF
                                                      seminars on pension
                                                      scheme for employers,
                                                      employees, and others.

                                                   · Createcommercial
                                                      spots, leaflets, radio,
                                                      and TV promotions.

                      · Formulatestrategic · Conductappraisal · Continuetodevelop                         NSSFC, NFV,
                                                                                                              PWDF
                      plan and recruit staff. of staff and review              staff capacity and

                      · S etupworkplacesin 3-year capacity-                    review performance
                         the capital, provinces, building plan.                effectiveness.

                      cities, districts,           · Continuetosetup · D evelopstrategicplan

                      and khans.                   workplaces in the           and action plan in

                      · Preparean                     capital, provinces,         Stage 3.
                         organization                 cities, districts,
                         structure.                   and khans.               · Recruitadditionalstaff.

                      · D evelopinternal           · Recruitadditional         · C ontinuetoorganize
                         rules and personnel          required staff.             consultative
                                                                                  workshops for

                      statute.                     · C ontinuetoorganize legal and policy

                      · C reatepersonnel           workshops for               dissemination.
                         cadre at the central,     legal and policy
                         capital, and provincial,  dissemination on the
                         city, district, and       social security scheme.

                      khan levels.                 · A ssessstaff

                                                   performance.

                                                                                                   continued on next page
78 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

Table continued        SHORT-TERM              MEDIuM-TERM                  LONG-TERM          Agencies
Development         Target 2011­2014          Target 2014­2017          Target 2017­2020      Concerned
Policy Area
                    · Developstaffcapacity
Strengthening          on management,
and development        accounting,
of social security     computer, planning,
scheme                 preparing budget
                       proposals, etc.
Enhanced
cooperation         · Organizeconsultative
with local and         workshop on
international          legal and policy
development            dissemination
partners and           on social security
promote regional       scheme.
and global
integrations        · Updatebeneficiaries' · Continuetoupdate           · R eviewperformance  NSSFC, NFV,
Setting up of IT                                                           effectiveness.         PWDF
system              data.                     beneficiaries' data.

                    · Preparelegal            · Implementand
                       framework and             disseminate legal
                       regulations.              documents.

                    · Prepareanddevelop · Improvesocial

                    social health             health insurance for

                    insurance for civil       civil servants.

                    servants' benefit.        · P reparesub-

                    · Undertakeactuarial decree regarding

                    study and estimate        contribution rate for

                    the viability of          active members of

                    the social security       NFV and PWDF.

                    scheme.                   · R eviewthe3-year

                    · Providesocialsecurity planning activity.

                    scheme through the

                    banking system.

                    · S trengthen             · Continuecooperation                           NSSFC, NFV,
                                                                                                  PWDF
                    cooperation with          with strategic partners.

                    relevant ministries       · Strengthenand
                    and institutions.            expand partnership

                    · C ooperatewith          with local and

                    private companies and international NGOs

                    banks.                    and donors to

                    · Joinasamemberof seek technical and
                       ASEAN Social Security financial support.

                    Association.

                    · D eveloppartnership
                       with local and
                       international NGOs
                       to seek technical and
                       financial support.

                    · DevelopITsystem         · R eviewthe              · Buildanew           NSSFC, NFV,
                       and database.             installation of IT        data center.           PWDF
                                                 equipment.
                    · InstallITequipment.
                                              · Controlandimprove
                    · E stablisha                maintenance.
                       central database.

                    · E stablishwebsite.

                                                                                         continued on next page
                                             Action Plan for Financial Sector Development 2011­2020 79

Table continued

Development           SHORT-TERM              MEDIuM-TERM                  LONG-TERM               Agencies
Policy Area        Target 2011­2014          Target 2014­2017          Target 2017­2020           Concerned
Fund investment
                   · F ormulatepolicy        · U ndertakeinvestment · Undertakeinvestment         NSSFC, NFV,
Development of        and guidelines on                                                               PWDF
private voluntary     fund investment.       activities.               monitoring and
pension
                                                                       evaluation.

                                                                       · Conductfeasibility
                                                                          study on credit
                                                                          initiation.

                   · D evelopalegaland · Incorporatespecialized · R eviewthelessons               MEF, MoSVY,
                                                                       learned from                   MLVT
                   regulatory framework companies for
                                                                                                  Lead agency:
                   for private voluntary managing private              implementing private            MEF

                   pensions.                 voluntary pension         voluntary pension

                   · E stablishapension      funds.                    development and
                      fund administrative
                      office.                · C ontinuetobuildthe     institute changes
                                                capacity of technical  to respond to the
                   · Recruitstaffand            staff for managing     level of market
                      build capacity.           pension funds.         developments.

                   · Organizeinternal        · Initiatetraining        · Continueto
                      and external training     programs in public        develop the
                      courses on required       and private academic      capacity of technical
                      technical skills for      institutions.             staff for managing
                      managing and                                        pension funds.
                      controlling private    · S etupthenecessary
                      voluntary pension         IT system for private  · C arryouttraining
                      funds.                    voluntary pension.        programs in public
                                                                          and through private
                                             · Createawebpage             academic institutions.
                                                for disseminating
                                                information on the     · ModernizeITsystem.

                                             benefits of private

                                             voluntary pensions

                                             and the benefits of

                                             regular savings.

ASEAN = Association of Southeast Asian Nations; IT = information technology; MEF = Ministry of Economy and Finance;
MoSVY = Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation; NFV = National Fund for Veterans; NGO = nongovernment
organization; NSSF = National Social Security Fund; NSSFC = National Social Security Fund for Civil Servants; PWDF = Persons with
Disability Foundation.
80 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

Capital Market

Key Accomplishments:
     · T heLawonGovernmentSecuritieswaspassedin2007.

     · TheLawontheIssuanceandTradingofNon-GovernmentSecuritieswaspassed
         in 2007.

     · TheLawonInsolvencywaspassedin2007.

     · T heLawonFinancefor2010ManagementallowstheGovernmentofCambodia
         to establish a Center for Financial Development.

     · TheSub-decreeontheConductandOrganizationoftheSecuritiesandExchange
         Commission of Cambodia (SECC) was signed into effect on 28 July 2008.

     · T heSECCwasestablishedinJuly2008.

     · T heCambodiaSecuritiesExchange,ajointventurecompany,wasestablishedby
         the Ministry of Economy and Finance and the Korea Exchange in September 2009.

     · T he Sub-decree on Tax Incentives in the Securities Sector was signed on
         22 April 2011.

     · Thecoreprakas to enable the establishment and operation of the securities market
         were formally introduced by the SECC in 2010.

     · A total of 15 companies were granted licenses (7 underwriters, 4 brokers,
         2 dealers, and 2 investment advisors) on 20 October 2010.

     · A pprovalsweregrantedtoanoperatorofthesecuritiesmarket,anoperatorofa
         clearing and settlement facility, and an operator of a securities depository.

     · A ccreditationwasgiventocashsettlementagentsrelatedtosecurities,securities
         registrars, securities transfer agents, paying agents, professional accounting firms,
         independent auditors, and asset valuers.

     · Thegovernmenthasidentifiedthreestate-ownedenterprisestobelisted.

     · In January 2011, the SECC signed a memorandum of understanding with the
         Financial Institute of Cambodia to provide training related to the securities sector.

Future Reforms:

Development            SHORT-TERM                MEDIuM-TERM                LONG-TERM             Agencies
Policy Area         Target 2011­2014            Target 2014­2017        Target 2017­2020         Concerned

Development of the  Develop the              Monitor and             Deepen the                  MEF, NBC,
government          government securities    strengthen government   development of                  SECC
bond market         market:                  securities market       government securities
Operation of                                 performance:            market:                    Lead agency:
a government        · Developthelegal                                                                MEF
securities market      and regulatory        · R eviewperformance    · C onsiderissuing
                       framework to             of primary market       government bonds.
                       support the issuance     dealers and develop
                       and trading of           performance-
                       government               based accreditation
                       securities.              procedures on the
                                                basis of incentives
                    · Considerissuing           and penalties.
                       short-term treasury
                       bills denominated

                                                                     continued on next page
                                              Action Plan for Financial Sector Development 2011­2020 81

Table continued       SHORT-TERM               MEDIuM-TERM                  LONG-TERM              Agencies
 Development       Target 2011­2014           Target 2014­2017          Target 2017­2020          Concerned
 Policy Area
                   in riel based on           · C onsiderissuing
 Support for       a predetermined               treasury securities
 infrastructure    borrowing program             of duration of more
 Compliance with   with NBC to determine         than 1 year.
 core principles   the timing of market
 Secondary market  distribution for
 regulation        investment and reserve
                   purposes.

                   · D evelopbidding
                      procedures and
                      an auction system
                      for issuance of
                      government
                      securities.

                   · E stablishasystem
                      for accreditation
                      of primary market
                      dealers in government
                      securities.

                   · Establishsupport         · Conductduediligence · R eviewandupgrade            MEF, NBC,
                      infrastructure for                                                               SECC
                      securities market:      on operating systems as needed depending
                      depositories and                                                            Lead agency:
                      securities clearing     to ensure they are        upon market                    SECC
                      and settlements
                      facilities, and         operating smoothly        developments.
                      payment system link-
                      up with the national    and safely.
                      payment system.

                   · C onductaself-           · Includereviewsystem     · Reviewregulatory         MEF, NBC,
                      assessment to              in the next financial     framework and SECC          SECC
                      confirm if the current     sector assessment         structure to ensure
                      system conforms            program.                  they remain relevant   Lead agency:
                      to the IOSCO Core                                    to market conditions.       SECC
                      Principles and
                      the Committee
                      on Payment and
                      Settlement Systems,
                      as well as IOSCO
                      recommendations on
                      securities settlement
                      systems.

                   · CambodiaSecurities       · O verseerenewal                                   SECC
                      Exchange listing rules     of licenses to all
                      approved in May            securities market
                      2011.                      participants.

                   · Introducerules
                      used for licensing/
                      authorizing/
                      accrediting

                                                                                       continued on next page
82 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

Table continued          SHORT-TERM               MEDIuM-TERM              LONG-TERM              Agencies
 Development          Target 2011­2014           Target 2014­2017      Target 2017­2020          Concerned
 Policy Area
 Insolvency           examinations            · Enforcethe                                       SECC
                      for all securities         application of
 Credit rating        market participants        the sub-decree                                  SECC
 agency               including fit and          on insolvency.
 Market mechanism     proper testing.                                  · Implementsecurities       MEF, NBC,
 and instruments                              · Implementcredit           borrowing and                SECC
                   · Draftsub-decreeon           ratings of publicly      lending mechanism.
 Asset valuers        bankruptcy related         listed securities.                              Lead agencies:
 Corporate            to the operation of                                                        MEF and SECC
 governance           the securities market.  · Iffeasible,develop
                                                 securities borrowing  · Establishcooperation     MEF, SECC
                   · A doptand                   and lending              to enhance the         Lead agency:
                      promulgate the sub-        mechanism.               knowledge of
                      decree on insolvency.                               asset valuers with          SECC
                                              · Iffeasible,setupa         regional and
                   · R esearchand                securities finance       international valuers   MEF, SECC,
                      develop regulation         corporation.             and appraisers.             NBC
                      on credit rating
                      agency.                 · Iffeasible,set         · C ontinuetodevelop      Lead agency:
                                                 up a sovereign           and enhance the             SECC
                   · C onsiderthe                wealth fund.             code of corporate
                      procedures to allow                                 governance based
                      securities borrowing    · A lignstandardswith       on urgent needs and
                      and lending.               international norms.     best practices.

                   · Conductfeasibility       · Reviewthe
                      study for setting up       implementation
                      a securities financing     of the prakas
                      mechanism.                 on corporate
                                                 governance both for
                   · C onductfeasibility         listed and unlisted
                      study for setting up       companies.
                      a sovereign wealth
                      fund.                   · D evelopand
                                                 conduct training
                   · D evelopprofessional        programs if needed
                      asset valuers and          to strengthen
                      valuation standards        adherence with
                      for securities             principles
                      market operation.

                   · Implementthe
                      prakas on corporate
                      governance for
                      listed companies.

                   · P romotethe
                      application
                      of corporate
                      governance among
                      unlisted companies
                      and conduct
                      an educational
                      campaign on
                      corporate

                                                                       continued on next page
                                                Action Plan for Financial Sector Development 2011­2020 83

Table continued            SHORT-TERM               MEDIuM-TERM                  LONG-TERM            Agencies
 Development            Target 2011­2014           Target 2014­2017          Target 2017­2020        Concerned
 Policy Area                                       of corporate
 Investor education     governance for             governance                · C ontinueto           SECC
 and protection         both listed and            by operating                 enhance investor
                        unlisted companies,        companies.                   education programs.
 Promotion of           with emphasis on
 media education        responsibilities of     · Continueinvestor           · Implementinvestor
 and awareness          boards of directors,       education programs           compensation fund.
                        corporate secretaries,     and refine them
                        and management.            based on feedback         · Disclosealllevels     SECC
                                                   and market                   of information to
                     · P reparethe                 developments.                the press.
                        plan to educate
                        domestic investors,     · Iffeasible,establish
                        including necessary        an investor
                        educational                compensation
                        materials, identifying     fund with the
                        and assigning              requisite regulations
                        staff, and setting         and operational
                        up feedback                guidelines.
                        mechanisms.
                                                · Developcapability
                     · C onductinvestor            to deal with issues
                        education across           of information
                        the country.               disclosure at all levels
                                                   to the press.
                     · Considerthe
                        establishment of
                        an investor
                        compensation fund.

                     · Establishacustomer
                        dispute resolution
                        center within the
                        framework of SECC
                        to address public
                        complaints and
                        related cases that
                        may arise.

                     · Conducttraining
                        for financial and
                        other journalists
                        concerning the
                        securities business.

                     · S upportthe
                        development of a
                        code of professional
                        ethics for financial
                        and other journalists,
                        particularly with
                        respect to the
                        reporting of sensitive
                        market information.

                                                                                                   continued on next page
84 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

Table continued             SHORT-TERM                  MEDIuM-TERM               LONG-TERM               Agencies
 Development             Target 2011­2014              Target 2014­2017       Target 2017­2020           Concerned
 Policy Area
                      · Establishaliaison           · C onsiderITsystems      · D evelopITsystems        SECC
 Information             office within the             for surveillance of       for information         SECC
 technology              framework of the              securities market         disclosure and
 Improvement of          SECC for coordinating         operation.                surveillance of
 capacity building       with financial and                                      securities market
 for SECC and            other journalists,                                      operation.
 market participants     especially those that
                         report on information                                · Reviewthelevel
 Financial market        related to the                                          of skills attained
 cooperation             securities market.                                      within a specific
 Corporate                                                                       period, determine if
 bond market          · ConsiderITsystems                                        it is appropriate for
 development             for information                                         market requirements,
 Commodities             disclosure.                                             and modify and
 futures exchange                                                                update it as needed.
                      · S ECCtoprepare              · S ECCtoconsider
                         capacity-building             training needs and                                 MEF, SECC
                         plan for its staff in all     determine if this
                         facets of operation.          can be provided                                   Lead agency:
                                                       by the government                                      SECC
                      · SECCtoupdate                   or other training
                         and implement its             establishments,        · Reviewtheimpact             SECC
                         capacity-building             depending on the          of the regulations on   MEF, SECC
                         plan for market               increasing needs          market development
                         participants and the          that require external     and develop a
                         public.                       training.                 broad corporate
                                                                                 bond market.
                      · Continuetodevelop           · Considergaining
                         partnerships and              membership             · E stablisha
                         mutual cooperation            in IOSCO after            commodities futures
                         arrangements with             self-assessment           exchange, if feasible.
                         foreign regulatory            completion.
                         organizations and
                         securities exchanges.      · Implement
                                                       regulations for
                      · Establishlegal                 the development
                         and regulatory                of a corporate
                         framework for                 bond market.
                         the development
                         of a corporate             · Developthelegal
                         bond market.                  and regulatory
                                                       framework for a
                      · Undertakea                     commodities futures
                         feasibility study             exchange.
                         for setting up
                         a commodities
                         futures exchange.

                      · Undertakestudies
                         on the legal
                         and regulatory
                         framework for a
                         commodities futures
                         exchange.

                                                                              continued on next page
                                                   Action Plan for Financial Sector Development 2011­2020 85

Table continued              SHORT-TERM                MEDIuM-TERM                  LONG-TERM           Agencies
 Development              Target 2011­2014            Target 2014­2017          Target 2017­2020       Concerned
 Policy Area           · D evelopknowledge
 Trust and                and capacity             · E stablishregulations   · Reviewand                   SECC
 investment               related to trust            concerning the            strengthen the
 operations of            and investment              operation of              supervisory system
 nonbank financial        operations.                 investment funds          and legal documents
 institutions (NBFIs)                                 managed under trust       related to investment
 under the Law on      · E ncouragethe                by NBFIs relating         trusts operated
 Financial Trusts         development of              to the securities         by NBFIs.
                          other market players        business.
 Collective               that suit emerging                                 · R eviewrisk
 investment               market needs by          · E nsurethattrust           management
 schemes                  establishing the            and investment            systems and practices
 Other long-term          legal and regulatory        operations of             of NBFIs related to
 financial market         framework for them          NBFIs are based           their investment
 players                  to operate, including       on a prudent risk         operations under
                          securities companies,       management                trust.
                          investment operation        framework and
                          managers, securities        appropriate            · E nforcelegal           SECC
                          underwriters, market        guidelines and            documents related
                          dealers and brokers,        procedures.               to collective
                          venture capital funds/                                investment schemes.
                          companies, mutual        · E stablishcriteria
                          funds, other collective     and procedures for     · Continuetodevelop        MEF, SECC
                          investment scheme           authorizing trust         the capacity for
                          operators, etc.             and investment            oversight and          Lead agency:
                                                      products based on         surveillance over the       SECC
                                                      risk assessment and       operations of the
                                                      consumer/market           money market and
                                                      benefit.                  capital market.

                                                   · D evelopregulations
                                                      for collective
                                                      investment schemes.

                                                   · Implement
                                                      regulations for
                                                      collective investment
                                                      schemes.

                                                   · Ensurethatthe
                                                      operations of new
                                                      market players are
                                                      subject to licensing.

                                                                             continued on next page
86 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

Table continued

Development                SHORT-TERM                MEDIuM-TERM                  LONG-TERM           Agencies
Policy Area             Target 2011­2014            Target 2014­2017          Target 2017­2020       Concerned
Financial
development          · S tudymodelsof            · Developthe              · Establishafinancial         MEF
district                the establishment           regulatory                development district
                        of financial                framework to              that is based on
                        development                 support the               available capability.
                        districts.                  development
                                                    of a financial
                                                    development district.

IT = information technology, IOSCO = International Organization of Securities Commissions, MEF = Ministry of Economy and
Finance, NBC = National Bank of Cambodia, SECC = Securities and Exchange Commission of Cambodia.

Governance and Infrastructure

Legal and Regulatory Framework

Key Accomplishments:
     · T heLawonCorporateAccounts,TheirAuditandtheAccountingProfessionwas
         enacted on 8 July 2002.

     · TheLawontheAmendmentsofArticles2and15oftheLawontheCommercial
         Chamber was passed on 23 August 2006.

     · TheLawontheAmendmentofArticle18oftheLawonAuditingwaspassedon
         30 August 2006.

     · TheLawonSecuredTransactionswaspassedon22May2007.

     · T heLawonConcessionswaspassed19October2007.

     · T heLawonInsolvencywaspassed8December2007.

     · TheLawonFinancialLeasingwaspassed20June2009.

Future Reforms:

Development             SHORT-TERM                   MEDIuM-TERM               LONG-TERM              Agencies
Policy Area          Target 2011­2014               Target 2014­2017       Target 2017­2020          Concerned

Comprehensive        · Aparallelrevision         · S ubmittherevised                                     NBC
revision of the Law     of the LNBC and             laws to the Council
on the Organization     the LBFI should be          of Ministers and the
and the Conduct         undertaken as soon          National Assembly.
of the National         as possible due to
Bank of Cambodia        conflicts, loopholes,    · Arrangeforeffective
(LNBC) and of the       and need to improve         implementation of
Law on Banking          the overall legal           the approved laws.
and Financial           framework.
Institutions (LBFI)
                     · S uchrevisionis
                        required with the
                        aim of clarifying
                        and enhancing
                        the institutional
                        framework; clarifying
                        the roles and
                        responsibilities of the
                        authorities in charge
                        to support

                                                                           continued on next page
                                                  Action Plan for Financial Sector Development 2011­2020 87

Table continued             SHORT-TERM                MEDIuM-TERM               LONG-TERM              Agencies
 Development             Target 2011­2014            Target 2014­2017       Target 2017­2020          Concerned
 Policy Area
                         and promote effective    · Submitthedraftlaw       · Setupbudget,             MOC, MOJ
 Finalization of the     cooperation as well         on the commercial         structure, and
 commercial              as clear accountability     court to the Council      administrative system  Lead agency:
 legal framework         principles; the             of Ministers and the      for specialized court       MOC
                         joint efforts to            National Assembly.        and commence
 Law on                  maintain financial                                    operation.
 financial trust         stability, liquidity     · D raftthelawon
 Accounting and          condition support,          commercial agents.     · Organizetraining
 Audit Law               consumer protection,                                  for court personnel
                         immunity, etc.           · Issueimplementing          on the handling of
                                                     regulations               commercial disputes,
                      · Revisethelawsto              concerning trusts and     including securities
                         be submitted to the         promotion of their        market issues
                         Council of Ministers        use.                      and cases.
                         and the National
                         Assembly.                · Issueadditional         · S ubmitthelawon
                                                     regulations to            commercial agents
                      · S ubmitthedraft              implement the             to the Council of
                         law on commercial           Accounting and            Ministers and the
                         contracts to the            Auditing Law.             National Assembly.
                         National Assembly,
                         including the                                      · Deepenthe                MEF, NBC,
                         chapter on franchise                                  knowledge on                SECC
                         contracts.                                            the application of
                                                                               trusts on various      Lead Agency:
                      · R eviewdraftlaw                                        investment products         MEF
                         on the commercial                                     in the market.
                         court.                                                                        MEF, NAC,
                                                                                                         KICPAA
                      · Agreeonthe
                         common approach                                                              Lead Agency:
                         to set up a                                                                       NAC
                         specialized court for
                         handling commercial
                         cases.

                      · Issueimplementing
                         regulations after
                         the enactment of
                         the law.

                      · D raftfinancialtrust
                         law and submit to
                         Council of Ministers
                         and the National
                         Assembly.

                      · Revisethe
                         Accounting and
                         Auditing Law and
                         related regulations to

                          (i) remove
                               inconsistencies
                               with respect
                               to the size of
                               organizations
                               that are
                               required

                                                                            continued on next page
88 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

Table continued            SHORT-TERM              MEDIuM-TERM               LONG-TERM      Agencies
 Development            Target 2011­2014          Target 2014­2017       Target 2017­2020  Concerned
 Policy Area
                              to produce       · E nactthelawon                   MOC, NBC,
 E-commerce law               IFRS-based          electronic payments                 SECC
 Commercial                   financial           and transfers or the
 dispute resolution           statements;         e-commerce law                Lead agencies:
                        (ii) create               with provisions on               NBC and
                              monitoring,         electronic transfers.               MOC
                              examining,
                              and evaluating   · Developcommercial                MOC, MOJ
                              mechanisms of       arbitration networks.          Lead agency:
                              law enforcement
                              and accounting   · Supportthe                           MOC
                              standards           development of
                              compliance; and     dispute resolution     continued on next page
                        (iii) improve the         techniques at the
                              institutional       provincial and
                              capacity of NAC     district levels.
                              and KICPAA.

                     · S ubmittherevised
                        Accounting and
                        Auditing Law to
                        the Council of
                        Ministers and the
                        National Assembly.

                     · E nactmentofthe
                        revised Accounting
                        and Auditing Law
                        by the National
                        Assembly.

                     · Revisetheproposed
                        law on electronic
                        payments and
                        transfers or
                        incorporate
                        provisions for
                        electronic payments
                        under the
                        e-commerce law.

                     · Completethe
                        examinations for the
                        founding arbitration
                        members. Elect an
                        executive board
                        from the successful
                        arbitrators and
                        officially establish
                        the National
                        Arbitration Center.
                                                Action Plan for Financial Sector Development 2011­2020 89

Table continued             SHORT-TERM              MEDIuM-TERM               LONG-TERM               Agencies
 Development             Target 2011­2014          Target 2014­2017       Target 2017­2020           Concerned
 Policy Area
                      · Supportthe              · Submitcompetition       · Issueimplementing         MEF, MOC,
 Competition             development of            law to the Council        regulations and set          MOJ
 and consumer            dispute resolution        of Ministers and the      up a competition
 protection policies     techniques at the         National Assembly.        commission to           Lead agency:
                         national dispute                                    enforce the law              MOC
 Rule of law             resolution center.     · Submitconsumer             and regulations.
 and law-making                                    protection law to                                  Council of
 process              · Continueto                 the Council of         · Issueimplementing        Jurists, MEF,
                         recruit and train         Ministers and the         regulations and set up  MOJ, MOC,
                         new arbitrators.          National Assembly.        a consumer protection    NBC, SECC
                                                                             commission to           Lead agency:
                      · Adoptcompetition        · Centralizedraftlaws        enforce the law          Council of
                         policy and draft          with official English     and regulations.
                         competition law by        translations.                                       Ministers
                         taking into account                              · Assessregulatory
                         the special needs of   · D eveloplocallegal         impact of drafting
                         the financial sector.     drafting capacity.        new laws,
                                                                             regulations, and
                      · Adopttheconsumer                                     rules.
                         protection policy
                         and draft consumer
                         protection law.

                      · Continuetosupport
                         the rule of law in
                         the financial sector
                         through public
                         consultations
                         on all draft laws
                         and regulations
                         pertaining to the
                         financial sector.

                      · O nlinedisplayofall
                         laws and regulations
                         relating to the
                         financial sector for
                         public access.

                      · Enhancethecapacity
                         of the Council of
                         Jurists by providing
                         necessary resources
                         for screening all
                         proposed laws for
                         accuracy and to
                         ensure any conflict
                         with any other
                         law is properly
                         addressed prior to
                         their submission
                         to the Council of
                         Ministers and the
                         National Assembly.

                                                                          continued on next page
90 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

Table continued

Development            SHORT-TERM             MEDIuM-TERM          LONG-TERM                    Agencies
Policy Area         Target 2011­2014         Target 2014­2017  Target 2017­2020                Concerned

                 · S etupacentral
                    depository office at
                    MOC that will be
                    responsible for online
                    dissemination of all
                    commercial laws,
                    regulations, and
                    rules in Cambodia
                    with accurate and
                    officially approved
                    English translations to
                    provide easy access to
                    investors.

IFRS = International Financial Reporting Standards, KICPAA = Kampuchea Institute of Certified Public Accountants and Auditors,
MEF = Ministry of Economy and Finance, MOC = Ministry of Commerce, MOJ = Ministry of Justice, NAC = National Accounting
Council, NBC = National Bank of Cambodia, SECC = Securities and Exchange Commission of Cambodia.

Accounting and Auditing

Key Accomplishments:
     · In April 1999, the International Accounting Standards Research Committee
         was formed.

     · In March 2003, a Sub-decree on the Composition and the Functioning of the
         National Accounting Council was issued.

     · In March 2003, a Sub-decree on the Composition and the Functioning of the
         Kampuchea Institute of Certified Public Accountants and Auditors (KICPAA)
         was issued.

     · In October 2003, 15 accounting standards and 10 auditing standards were
         introduced.

     · In June 2006, a simplified reporting template for small- and medium-sized
         enterprises (SMEs) was introduced.

     · In July 2007, a regulation was issued (prakas No. 643) requiring enterprises to
         submit their financial statements for audit.

     · In January 2009, the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) for all
         entities operating in Cambodia, including any interpretation and modernization
         of those standards issued by the International Accounting Standards Board, were
         fully introduced for implementation.

     · In August 2009, further regulation was introduced, stipulating that the above
         financial reporting standards were to be called Cambodia International Financial
         Reporting Standards (CIFRS) and that application would start from 1 January 2012
         for public liability entities, except the CIFRS for SMEs, introduced 1 January 2010.

     · In November 2009, KICPAA was admitted as an associate of the International
         Federation of Accountants (IFAC).

     · InMay2010,theCambodianInternationalStandardsonAuditingandAssurance
         was promulgated.
                                               Action Plan for Financial Sector Development 2011­2020 91

· KICPAA'scodeofethicshasbeenreplacedbytheCodeofEthicsforProfessional
    Accountants issued by IFAC. At the same time, KICPAA's bylaws are being revised
    as well.

· A reviewhasrecentlybeenmadeofthecurrentstateofeducationofaccountants
    and auditors in Cambodia, including an appraisal against the education
    requirements of IFAC.

Future Reforms:

Development                SHORT-TERM           MEDIuM-TERM                   LONG-TERM                Agencies
Policy Area             Target 2011­2014       Target 2014­2017            Target 2017­2020          Concerned
Monitoring of legal
and regulatory       · Developanew             · Usethenew                 · M aintainand             MEF, MOC,
compliance              system to register        registration                further develop the         NAC
                        all commercial            system to monitor           registration system.
                        enterprises and           compliance with                                         Lead
                        annually update key       regulations and the                               agencies: MEF
                        data related to the       Law on Taxation, and
                        private sector to         to provide statistical                              and MOC
                        provide information       information on
                        to regulatory             private sector activity
                        authorities and the       to the government.
                        general public.
                                               · S trengthenthe
                                                  technical capacity of
                                                  NAC staff to monitor,
                                                  examine, and assess
                                                  the compliance with
                                                  financial reporting
                                                  requirements.

Resolutions to       · Compare                                                       NAC, NBC
address the             the technical                                             Lead agencies:
challenges that         differences between                                       NAC and NBC
occur in the            Cambodia IFRS
transitional period     and the prudential                                 continued on next page
                        regulations of NBC
                        for banks and MFIs,
                        and with other
                        financial sector
                        regulators.

                     · Issueappropriate
                        measures to introduce
                        IFRS in a phased
                        manner to banks,
                        MFIs, and other
                        subsectors in the
                        transitional period.
92 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

Table continued

Development           SHORT-TERM            MEDIuM-TERM                 LONG-TERM        Agencies
Policy Area        Target 2011­2014        Target 2014­2017          Target 2017­2020   Concerned
Institutional                                                                          NAC, KICPAA
strengthening and  · StrengthenNAC's · F urtherenhance
capacity building
                   organizational          and strengthen the

                   structure, KICPAA,      capacity of NAC to

                   and their authorities. monitor and enforce

                   · D eveloppractical     implementation
                      mechanisms           of relevant laws,
                      for monitoring       standards, and rules.

                   and enforcing           · Implementthe

                   compliance with         mechanism to

                   laws, standards, and monitor and

                   relevant rules based    enforce application

                   on the new              of relevant laws,

                   Law on Accounting       standards, and rules.

                   and Auditing.           · Launchthe

                   · E nhancethecapacity Cambodian CPA

                   of NAC staff for        program.

                   monitoring and          · Traincoretrainers
                   enforcing relevant         and lecturers on
                   laws, standards,           accounting and
                   and rules.                 auditing.

                   · D evelopa             · L aunchaccounting
                      Cambodian CPA           and auditing lexicon.
                      training program.

                   · D eveloptherules
                      and standards to
                      expand KICPAA's
                      membership.

                   · Studyandprepare
                      accounting and
                      auditing lexicon to
                      ensure consistent
                      use of technical
                      terminologies in
                      the sector.

CPA = certified public accountant, IFRS = International Financial Reporting Standards, KICPAA = Kampuchea Institute of Certified
Public Accountants and Auditors, MEF = Ministry of Economy and Finance, MFI = microfinance institution, MOC = Ministry of
Commerce, NAC = National Accounting Council, NBC = National Bank of Cambodia.
                                             Action Plan for Financial Sector Development 2011­2020 93

Payment System

Key Accomplishments
     · U pdatedthenationalpaymentsystemroadmap.

     · Introducedaninterimsolutionforcheckclearing.

     · E stablishedelectronicclearingarrangementsbetweenfivecommercialbanks.

     · Introducedaprakas to regulate the operation of third-party operators under the
         mobile phone payment system.

Future Reforms:

Development         SHORT-TERM                MEDIuM-TERM                   LONG-TERM           Agencies
Policy Area      Target 2011­2014            Target 2014­2017           Target 2017­2020       Concerned

Payment system   · C ommission"full          · C onsiderthe             · E stablishRTGSifthe   NBC, SECC
                 solution" phase of          establishment of           market demands.        Lead agency:
                 the national payment        a real time gross
                 system, including           settlement system          · E xtendpayment            NBC
                 electronic transfers                                   services to all parts
                                             (RTGS) depending on of the country and
                 to effect "delivery            market developments.    encourage greater
                 vs. payment", ACH           · A doptthesub-decree      use of electronic
                 implementation,                                        payments to replace
                 centralized settlement,        and accompanying
                 defining settlement         regulations for            cash, including the
                 cash, introduction of       implementing the           use of network of
                                             law on the national        third-party service
                 direct credit operation, payment system.               providers, mobile
                    development of money                                   phone banking
                    market operations for    · Preparetheoversight         services, prepaid
                    US dollar/riel traders      principles, policies,      cards, SMS billing
                    cash settlement,            and guidelines             arrangements, etc.
                    shared switch               based on the BIS        · A rrangetojointhe
                    implementation,             Core Principles            ASEAN Payment
                    intraday settlement,        for Systematically         System Network.
                    and introduction of         Important Payment
                    direct debit operation.     Systems (SIPS).
                 · Enactthelawon
                    the national             · C onductself-
                    payment system.             assessment against
                                                BIS Core Principles
                 · Harmonizepayment             of SIPS.
                    system arrangements
                    with the SECC and        · C onsiderSWIFT
                    sign the MOU.               connectivity for high-
                                                value transactions

M-banking        · C onductassessment · C ontinuouslyupdate · Developfinancial                 NBC
                 of licensed third-party knowledge on                   cooperation
                 processors using the developments and                  arrangements on
                 BIS recommended             innovations regarding m-banking and
                 Risk Management             m-banking and              other services.
                 Principles.                 related services.

                 · Installshared
                    switch services.

                 · Issueprakas on
                    standards for mobile
                    phone messages,
                    on eCash, and on
                    eWallet.

ACH = Automated Clearing House, ASEAN = Association of Southeast Asian Nations, BIS = Bank for International Settlements,
MOU = memorandum of understanding, NBC = National Bank of Cambodia, SECC = Securities and Exchange Commission of
Cambodia, SMS = short message service, SWIFT = Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication.
94 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

Property Valuation, Estate Services, and Housing Development

Key Accomplishments:
     · F rom 2007 to 2011, 87 companies were licensed as property valuers and
         estate agents.
     · In2008,theCambodianValuersandEstateAgentsAssociationwasestablished.
     · In2009,theassociationbecamethe8thmemberoftheAssociationofSoutheast
         Asian Nations Valuers Association (AVA).
     · From2009to2011,20housingdeveloperswerelicensedashousingdevelopment
         businesses.
     · P articipatedinAVAcongressesandhostedthe17thPre-Congress.
     · O rganized several training courses on valuation to improve the capacity of
         license holders.
     · Attendedmanytrainingsessionsonvaluationorganizedbycountriesintheregion.

Future Reforms:

Development                SHORT-TERM             MEDIuM-TERM                 LONG-TERM           Agencies
Policy Area             Target 2011­2014         Target 2014­2017         Target 2017­2020       Concerned
Development of the
legal framework for  · D eveloplegal          · A doptthelaw           · R eviewandupgrade           MEF,
property valuation,     and regulatory           on housing               as necessary the        MLMUPC
estate services,        framework for            development and          legal and regulatory
and housing             property valuation,      the law on property      framework
development             estate services,         valuation and estate     pertaining to
                        and housing              services.                property valuation
                        development.                                      and estate markets
                                              · Develop                   to meet international
                     · D evelopappropriate       accommodating            standards.
                        standards for            regulations to
                        Cambodia, such as        implement the         · Strengthenlaw
                        valuation standards,     law on housing           enforcement.
                        estate agency            development and
                        standards, code of       the law on property
                        professional ethics,     valuation and
                        rules for execution,     estate services.
                        and table of
                        commission fees
                        for valuers and
                        estate agents.

                     · P reparethedraft
                        law on housing
                        development and
                        submit to the
                        Council of Ministers
                        and the National
                        Assembly.

                     · Draftthelawon
                        property valuation
                        and estate services.

                                                                       continued on next page
                                               Action Plan for Financial Sector Development 2011­2020 95

Table continued

Development               SHORT-TERM               MEDIuM-TERM                 LONG-TERM         Agencies
Policy Area            Target 2011­2014           Target 2014­2017         Target 2017­2020     Concerned
Capacity building
for property        · Developa                 · Trainstaffand          · Improvethe                MEF,
valuers, estate        training program           provide services for     professional skills   MLMUPC
service providers,     and establish a            external users.          of valuers to meet
and housing            professional training                               international
developers             institute for valuers,  · C ontinuehuman            standards.
                       appraisers, and real       resource capacity
                       estate participants        building.
                       within existing
                       training facilities.

                    · S trengthen
                       the capacity of
                       regulators, valuers,
                       appraisers, real
                       estate agents,
                       housing developers,
                       and other market
                       participants
                       through national
                       and international
                       programs.

MEF = Ministry of Economy and Finance; MLMUPC = Ministry of Land Management, Urban Planning and Construction.
96 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

Capacity Building

Future Reforms:

Development                  SHORT-TERM              MEDIuM-TERM                    LONG-TERM           Agencies
Policy Area               Target 2011­2014          Target 2014­2017            Target 2017­2020       Concerned
Comprehensive
needs assessment       · Designatefocal          · Increasecooperation       · Developlong-term        MEF, MOC,
for capacity              points for capacity       among authorities           capacity-building      NBC, SECC
building of financial     building within           to share training and       programs for staff
sector regulatory         each agency to            capacity-building           at all levels.
agencies                  undertake training        efforts.
                          needs assessment.                                  · D evelopregional
                          Conduct training       · D eveloptraining             and international
                          needs assessment          cross-postings and          cooperation
                          or survey of all          on-the-job training         arrangements on
                          sectors at ministries     for ministry and            capacity building,
                          and institutions to       agency staff who are        such as employee
                          identify the training     selected on the basis       exchange, cross-
                          needs of the              of their performance        postings, etc.
                          financial sector.         and potential, in
                                                    order to enhance         · Adequacyof
                       · P rioritizetraining        cross-fertilization         capacity building
                          needs and draw            of knowledge to             shall be periodically
                          up comprehensive          broaden civil service       reassessed in light
                          training programs,        skills and to provide       of achievements
                          determine training        job enrichment              or progress and
                          needs that are            according to projected      professional and
                          common and those          career paths of the         technical challenges
                          that need specialized     staff.                      arising from new
                          expertise, and                                        developments of
                          determine how these    · E nsureclose                 any type.
                          can be delivered          coordination and
                          in the most cost-         planning of training
                          effective manner,         delivered by various
                          the facilities to be      development
                          used, and funding         partners to ensure
                          requirements for the      wider coverage and
                          financial sector over     applicability to the
                          a 5-year period.          domestic situation.

                       · Identifyareas           · Providetrainingand
                          where training and        capacity building
                          capacity building         on international
                          can be organized          accounting and
                          together in one           reporting standards
                          training center and       (IAS/IFRS)
                          formulate a capacity-
                          building road map.     · Includetrainingand
                                                    capacity building
                                                    on IFRS, IAS, and
                                                    other international
                                                    standards on their
                                                    application
                                                    to banks and
                                                    financial institutions.

                                                                             continued on next page
                                                 Action Plan for Financial Sector Development 2011­2020 97

Table continued           SHORT-TERM              MEDIuM-TERM                  LONG-TERM              Agencies
 Development           Target 2011­2014          Target 2014­2017          Target 2017­2020          Concerned
 Policy Area
 Implementation of                               · Trainedstafftobe
 effective "train the                               required to transfer
 trainers" policies                                 knowledge to
 within competent                                   other staff through
 institutions                                       lecturing and
                                                    on-the-job training.
 Accounting
 and auditing                                    · D evelop"trainthe
                                                    trainers" programs
                                                    to improve in-house
                                                    skills for training
                                                    and development.

                       · Eachagencyto            · Increasingly            · Pursuethe               MEF, NBC,
                          identify potential        disseminate               long-term goal of         SECC
                          candidates with           knowledge and             gaining increasing
                          adequate experience       capacity among            independence with
                          and background            officers and              regard to training
                          and designate             staff based on            needs and available
                          key trainers who          internal trainers'        resources for
                          are willing to            performances and          capacity building (by
                          take training             personal experience.      putting the emphasis
                          responsibilities.                                   on training and
                                                 · D evelopwatch              practical application
                       · C ommencetraining          functions on              of experience).
                          of trainers covering      international
                          core training courses     standards, regulatory
                          designed for newly        framework, and
                          recruited staff and       market developments;
                          for staff promoted or     make use of the
                          taking new positions      internal trainers to
                          within an institution     disseminate the
                          (authorities).            information about
                                                    the changes; and
                       · Takeadvantageof            maintain up-to-date
                          technical training        knowledge on a
                          delivered by              broader sector level.
                          technical assistance
                          providers to "trained
                          specialists" who, in
                          turn, could become
                          key trainers.

                       · Requireall              · Continuescholarship                                NAC, NBC,
                                                                                                     SECC, KICPAA
                       universities that         program for students
                                                                                                     Lead agency:
                       provide accounting        undertaking CAT and                                      NAC

                       and auditing degrees CPA course.

                       to adopt a standard · Continue"trainthe
                       IFRS-based syllabus.
                                                 trainer" courses

                       · Continuescholarship for accounting and

                       program for               auditing

                       students undertaking

                       certified accounting

                       technician (CAT) and

                       CPA programs.

                                                                           continued on next page
98 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

Table continued

Development            SHORT-TERM             MEDIuM-TERM              LONG-TERM      Agencies
Policy Area         Target 2011­2014         Target 2014­2017      Target 2017­2020  Concerned

                 · "Trainthe                 lecturers to develop
                    trainer" courses         the capabilities
                    for accounting           of trainers at
                    and auditing             universities and
                    lecturers need           those engaged in the
                    to be introduced         CPA course.
                    to develop the
                    capabilities of       · Continuedeveloping
                    trainers at both         capacity of officers
                    universities and         and staff of MEF,
                    those engaged in the     NBC, and SECC
                    CPA course.              to understand
                                             financial statements
                 · Developthecapacity        prepared under the
                    of MEF, NBC, and         modern accounting
                    SECC to understand       framework and
                    financial statements     enhance their
                    prepared under the       ability to monitor
                    modern accounting        compliance
                    framework and            with prudential
                    enhance their            requirements
                    ability to monitor       through both
                    compliance               formal technical
                    with prudential          (classroom) training
                    requirements             and mentoring or
                    through both             on-the job-training
                    formal technical         by experienced
                    (classroom) training     accountants.
                    and mentoring or
                    on-the-job training
                    by experienced
                    accountants.

CPA = certified public accountant, KICPAA = Kampuchea Institute of Certified Public Accountants and Auditors, MEF = Ministry of
Economy and Finance, MOC = Ministry of Commerce, NAC = National Accounting Council, NBC = National Bank of Cambodia,
SECC = Securities and Exchange Commission of Cambodia.
                                                                           Chapter Title

Appendix 1

Key Financial Data

Indicators               2001  2002  2003  2004   2005  2006  2007   2008  2009  2010
                         13.0  15.6  16.3  18.4   18.4  20.5  25.8   29.3  32.4  38.3
Money supply/             33    32
GDP (%)                  58.5  49.3   17 17         18 20 24          30    33    36
                                     40.6 34.5    32.0 26.0 24.0     27.6  32.3  31.4
Number of                  ­     ­                118.0 108.0 104.2  81.3  91.0  90.6
registered banks          6.0   6.3    ­­
                         68.2  86.8
Average CAR (%)          10.4  12.7  7.2 8.5      9.3 12.2 18.3 23.6 24.5 28.0
                          62    84
Average liquidity ratio    ­     ­   105.3 123.9  145.2 164.9 197.3 230.1 263.0 286.0
of banks (%)               ­     ­   13.1 15.0    14.5 17.9 26.6 22.8 30.7 34.4
                          8.1  14.6   113 149      206 285 456 699 927 1,067
Private sector credit/    0.6   1.1
GDP (%)                  12.5  14.0  ­ 35         47 106 155 311 347 360

Number of loan           62.7  70.3    ­­          3 4 6 9 10 11
accounts (`000)                      12.7 9.6     7.3 9.8 3.4 3.7 4.37 3.05
                         80.8  83.6  0.9 1.2      1.8 2.8 2.8 2.8 1.3 1.4
Total deposits/GDP (%)
                         362   558   13.3 15.3    12.2 11.8 11.1 9.5 11.1 12.7
Number of bank             ­     ­
depositors (`000)          ­     ­   68.6 66.6    63.3 66.3 70.0 71.0 68.0 65.7

Number of                            80.9 78.3    71.0 70.0 73.0 73.0 75.6 74.8
bank branches
                                     640 797      923 1,173 1,486 1,880 1986 2,195
Number of bank                         ­­           ­ 64 118 338 406 501
employees (`000)                       ­­           ­ ­ ­ 3,295 3,305 3,529
                                                                                                continued on next page
NPLs/total loans (%)

Average return on
assets of banks (%)

Average interest
spread of banks (%)

Total assets of five
largest banks/total
assets (%)

Total deposits of
five largest banks/
total deposits (%)

Number of checks
cleared daily

Number of ATMs

Number of EFTPOS

                                                                                          99
100 Appendix 1

Table continued

Indicators            2001  2002  2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010
                        ­     ­     ­     ­     ­     ­     ­   322   453   592
Number of debit
cards (`000)          0 30 34 38 39 40 42 44 46 53

Number of licensed    ­ ­ ­ ­ 55 44 20 20 24 22
and registered MFIs
                      410.0 328.0 265.0 322.0 368.0 471.0 624.1 852.1 904.3 1,020.7
Average CAR
of MFIs (%)           35.9 51.3 32.6 40.9 49.2 92.2 160.1 284.7 308.3 439.2
                        ­ ­ ­ ­ 0.8 0.3 0.2 0.4 2.8 1.2
Total number of MFI   3.8 7.1 2.5 2.0 1.9 2.9 6.1 6.4 10.8 42.5
borrowers (`000)
                      158.6 107.2 88.5 123.0 137.6 113.3 148.0 155.3 171.2 240.1
Total amount of MFI
loans ($ million)     ­ 79 163 382 488 727 882 1,105 1,315 1,538

NPLs/total loans (%)  ­ 384 568 1,437 1,817 2,503 3,511 5,148 6,707 7,715

Total amount of MFI   1254446677
deposits ($ million)
                      3.6 5.5 8.8 10.1 10.8 13.0 17.5 20.7 20.1 24.8
Total number of MFI    ­ ­ 28,297 22,344 18,407 24,277 29,124 33,183 39,831 48,024
depositors (`000)

Number of MFI
branches (including
head office)

Number of
MFI employees

Number of insurance
firms (including
Cambodia Re)

Total insurance
premium ($ million)

Total number of
insurance policies

CAR = capital adequacy ratio, EFTPOS = electronic funds transfer at point of sale, GDP = gross domestic product, MFI = microfinance
institution, NPL = nonperforming loan.
Source: Ministry of Economy and Finance, National Bank of Cambodia.
                                                                      Chapter Title

Appendix 2

Composition of the Committee on Economic and Financial
Policy, the Steering Committee and the Technical Working
Group for Implementing the Financial Sector Development
Strategy 2011­2020

Committee on Economic and Financial Policy                            Chair
                                                                      Vice Chair
 1 Minister of Economy and Finance                                    Permanent
 2 Governor of the National Bank of Cambodia                          Vice Chair
 3 Chairman of the Supreme National Economic Council                  Member
                                                                      Member
 4 Minister of Planning                                               Member
 5 Minister of Land Management, Urban Planning and Construction       Member
 6 Minister of Commerce                                               Member
 7 Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries                    Member
 8 Minister of Industry, Mine and Energy                              Member
 9 Minister of Tourism                                                Member
10 Minister of Labor and Vocational Training                          Member
11 Minister of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation      Member
12 Minister of Water Resource Management and Meteorology              Member
13 Minister of Public Works and Transport                             Member
14 Secretary of State of the Office of the Council of Ministers
15 Secretary General of the Council for the Development of Cambodia

Committee on Economic and Financial Policy
(Members attending the Inter-Ministerial Meeting on 24 August 2011
in preparation for the Plenary Session of the Council of Ministers)

 1 Keat Chhon         Minister of Economy and Finance                 Chair
 2 Chea Chanto                                                        Vice Chair
 3 Aun Porn Moniroth  Governor of the National Bank of Cambodia       Permanent
                                                                      Vice Chair
 4 Chhay Than         Chairman of the Supreme National Economic       Member
 5 Thong Khon         Council                                         Member
 6 Ith Sam Heng                                                       Member
                      Minister of Planning
 7 Tram Iv Tek                                                        Member
 8 Pan Sorasak        Minister of Tourism                             Member
 9 Orm Kimsea                                                         Member
                      Minister of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth
10 Khann Morn         Rehabilitation                                  Member

                      Minister of Public Works and Transport

                      Representative of Minister of Commerce

                      Representative of Minister of Agriculture,
                      Forestry and Fisheries

                      Representative of Minister of Labor and
                      Vocational Training

                                                                                     101
102 Appendix 2

                11 Bun Hean           Representative of Minister of Water Resources     Member
                                      and Meteorology
                12 Hing Thoraxy                                                         Member
                13 Rath Sarin         Representative of Council of Ministers            Member

                14 Ith Prang          Representative of Minister of Land Management,    Member
                                      Urban Planning and Construction
                15 Sok Chenda Sophea                                                    Member
                                      Representative of Minister of Industry,
                16 Vonsey Vissoth     Mine and Energy                                   Secretary

                                      Secretary General of the Council for the
                                      Development of Cambodia

                                      Secretary General, Ministry of Economy
                                      and Finance

                Steering Committee for Implementing the Financial Sector
                Development Strategy 2011­2020

                 1 Chea Chanto        Governor, National Bank of Cambodia (NBC)         Chair
                 2 Chea Peng Chheang                                                    Vice Chair
                                      Secretary of State, Ministry of Economy and
                 3 Hang Chuon Naron   Finance (MEF)                                     Vice Chair
                 4 Mut Khiev                                                            Member
                                      Secretary of State, MEF
                 5 Mao Thora                                                            Member
                 6 Khuon Ranine       Secretary of State, Ministry of Social Affairs,   Member
                 7 Sum Sannisith      Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation (MoSVY)         Member
                 8 Ros Seilava                                                          Member
                 9 Chea Vuthy         Secretary of State, Ministry of Commerce (MOC)    Member

                10 Heng Sour          Under Secretary of State, MoSVY                   Member

                11 Ming Bankosal      Secretary General, NBC                            Member

                12 Chan Mono          Deputy Secretary General, MEF                     Member

                13 Kao Thach          Deputy Secretary General of the Cambodian         Member
                                      Special Economic Zone Board/Cambodia Institute
                                      of Banking, Council for the Development of
                                      Cambodia (CDC)

                                      Director General of Administration and Finance,
                                      Ministry of Labor and Vocational Training (MLVT)

                                      Director General, Securities and Exchange
                                      Commission of Cambodia (SECC)

                                      Director General of Administration and Finance,
                                      Ministry of Justice (MOJ)

                                      Deputy Director General, SECC
Composition of the Committee on Economic and Financial Policy, the Steering Committee and the       103
Technical Working Group for Implementing the Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

Technical Working Group for Implementing the
Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020

 1 Ros Seilava      Deputy Secretary General, MEF                                       Chair
 2 Phan Ho          Secretary General, Financial Intelligence Unit, NBC                 Vice Chair
 3 Kao Thach        Deputy Director General, SECC                                       Vice Chair
 4 Mey Vann         Director of Financial Industry Department (FID), MEF                Vice Chair
 5 Nguon Sokha      Technical Director General, NBC                                     Member
 6 Chea Serey       Deputy Director General of Supervision Department, NBC              Member
 7 Saneth Vathna    Deputy Director General, Directorate of Technical Affairs, MoSVY    Member
 8 Thai Saphear     Director of Economic Research Department, NBC                       Member
 9 Pen Thirong      Director of Investment and Cooperation Department, MEF              Member
10 Om Dararith      Director of Legal Affairs Department, MOC                           Member
11 Kaing Socheat    Director of Accounting and Finance Department, MOC                  Member
12 Sok Dara         Director of Securities Intermediaries Supervision Department, SECC  Member
13 Chhun Sambath    Director of Securities Issuance Department, SECC                    Member
14 Haing Tola       Director of Department of Finance and State Properties, MLVT        Member
15 Chhan Sina       Director of Department of Financial Affairs, MOJ                    Member
16 Nong Piseth      Deputy Director of FID, MEF                                         Member
17 Bou Chanphirou   Deputy Director of FID, MEF                                         Member
18 Ros Phirun       Deputy Director of FID, MEF                                         Member
19 Chou Vannak      Deputy Director of FID, MEF                                         Member
20 So Polen         Director of Securities Market Supervision Department, SECC          Member
21 Sok Soken        Deputy Director of Investment Project Evaluation                    Member
                    and Incentives Department, CDC
22 Chuor Rattanak   Director of National Social Security Fund                           Member
                    for Civil Servants (NSSFC), MoSVY
23 Hem Bora         Director of National Fund for Veterans, MoSVY                       Member
24 Cheng Kim Heang  Chief of Accounting Bureau, MOJ                                     Member
25 Cheng Sokmean    Deputy Director Department of Financial Affairs, MOJ                Member
26 Chhoeng Chantha  Head of Financial Market Division, MEF                              Member
27 Ney Sakal        Head of Micro-Finance and SMEs Division, MEF                        Member
28 Mao Pao          Acting Head of Real Estate Division, MEF                            Member
29 Ngor Dalene      Acting Head of Pawn Business Supervision Division, MEF              Member
30 Chhorn Dalis     Deputy Head of Insurance Division, MEF                              Member
31 Hak Ponnarin     Deputy Head of ADB Division, MEF                                    Member
32 Bou Tharin       Deputy Secretary General of National Accounting Council, MEF        Member
     Book Title

               Appendix 3

            ADB Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020 Team

     ADB Mission Team         Mission Leader/Principal Financial Sector Specialist
                              Senior Financial Sector Specialist
      1 Samiuela Tukuafu      Financial Sector Specialist (Rural and Microfinance)
      2 Hiroyuki Aoki         Economics and Finance Officer
      3 Kelly Hattel          Operations Assistant
      4 Poullang Doung
      5 Florissa V. Barot

     ADB TA7520 Consultant Team

      1 Renato M. Limjoco     Team Leader / International Banking Expert
      2 Desmond Robert Crane  International Accounting Expert
      3 Russell Ivan Leith    International Insurance and Pension Fund Expert
      4 Rodolfo M. Matienzo   International Microfinance Expert
      5 Frederika P. Santos   International Capital Market Expert
      6 Shaan W. Stevens      International Commercial Law Expert
      7 James E. Swander      International Leasing Expert
      8 Dy Davuth             National Financial Sector Expert
      9 Norng Makara          National Insurance Expert
     10 Sam Sokhom            National Capital Market Expert
     11 Suon Visal            National Legal Expert

104
Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020
With a rapidly growing commercial economy that requires a sound financial system to
sustain growth, Cambodia is committed to the long-term development of the financial sector,
channeling financial resources to productive investments, and managing the inherent risks to
achieve sustainable economic growth over the long term and contribute to poverty reduction.
Financial Sector Development Strategy 2011­2020 reflects Cambodia's achievements to date,
provides an assessment of current challenges and constraints to financial sector development,
the long-term goals, and a prioritized set of action plans for the next decade. Said strategy
will enable Cambodia's financial sector to integrate into the regional financial system and
support her long-term economic development agenda.

About the Asian Development Bank
ADB's vision is an Asia and Pacific region free of poverty. Its mission is to help its developing
member countries reduce poverty and improve the quality of life of their people. Despite the
region's many successes, it remains home to two-thirds of the world's poor: 1.8 billion people
who live on less than $2 a day, with 903 million struggling on less than $1.25 a day. ADB is
committed to reducing poverty through inclusive economic growth, environmentally
sustainable growth, and regional integration.

      Based in Manila, ADB is owned by 67 members, including 48 from the region. Its main
instruments for helping its developing member countries are policy dialogue, loans, equity
investments, guarantees, grants, and technical assistance.

Asian Development Bank          Printed in the Philippines
6 ADB Avenue, Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila, Philippines
www.adb.org

     Printed on recycled paper
