          KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA
           NATION RELIGION KING

NATIONAL BIODIVERSITY
            STRATEGY AND
              ACTION PLAN

                                 FEBRUARY 2016

                                                           National Council for Sustainable Development
                Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei Techo HUN SEN
                    Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia

                                            MESSAGE

Cambodia has one of the highest levels of forest cover in Southeast Asia and rich in biodiversity.
Forest ecosystems support biodiversity and provide many services, resources and functions
important for the livelihoods and wellbeing of the people in Cambodia, for wildlife, for Cambodia's
economy, and for mitigating climate change. The world's agricultural systems depend upon
biodiversity to sustain genetic plant and animal diversity, to provide pollination services, and to
maintain irrigation services. Urban cities depend upon biodiversity to provide clean drinking water
to their growing populations, while coastal communities depend upon the natural infrastructure of
coral reefs, sea grass beds, and mangroves to buffer them against impacts of climate change,
including sea-level rise and increased storm surges. Besides, rural communities depend upon the
natural infrastructure of forests, grasslands and wetlands to buffer them against increased drought,
flooding, disease and natural disasters.

While biodiversity provides fundamental goods and services upon which all life depends, it is
particularly important to the most vulnerable groups of our society. In Cambodia, indigenous ethnic
groups and remote rural communities depend heavily upon biodiversity for their basic necessities
such as food, water, shelter, medicine and their livelihoods.

As nations begin to plan for a green growth and climate-resilient future, they will be looking for
ways to find the most efficient and innovative solutions to meet both their social development needs
and their biodiversity conservation goals. Protected areas represent one of the most efficient and
effective strategies available for addressing the global challenges of poverty alleviation, while
adapting to and mitigating climate change, and maintaining key ecosystem services. Although the
upfront investments in protected areas and other conservation areas are high, the long-term
ecological, social and economic dividends can be significant.

In this regard, it is my great honour and pleasure, on behalf of the Royal Government of Cambodia,
to announce the official launch of the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP).
The NBSAP has reflected our political will and our firm commitment to safeguard biodiversity that
contributes to the country's economy and sustainable development, including poverty reduction,
through the conservation and sustainable use of its biological, natural and cultural resources and
other ecosystem services.

The NBSAP will guide line ministries and assist non-governmental organizations and development
partners in developing concrete and appropriate measures and actions to strengthen effectiveness of

                                                              i
biodiversity in contributing to the National Millennium Development Goal, National Sustainable
Development Strategy, the Strategic Plan on Green Growth, and the Cambodia Climate Change
Strategic Plan.
Taking this opportunity, I would like to express my sincere thanks and appreciation to the Ministry
of Environment, the National Council for Sustainable Development and its line departments,
academies, development partners, non-governmental organizations, and those who have contributed
to making this NBSAP updated.
Moreover, our ability to strengthen biodiversity and its contribution to national development
processes will be enhanced by active collaboration between line ministries and all relevant
stakeholders that are direct or indirect responsible for managing and supporting an effective and
coherent biodiversity conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity and its components in
Cambodia. The National Council for Sustainable Development and its Secretariat have a very
important role to play in facilitating partnerships with various stakeholders, and monitoring the
implementation of this strategic and action plan.
Once again, I urge all stakeholders from the Government, private sector, academia institutions,
national and international non-governmental organizations and development partners to continue
their close cooperation with the Ministry of Environment and the National Council for Sustainable
Development for the effective implementation of this updated NBSAP, which would contribute to
the development of Cambodia towards a green, climate-resilient, sustainable society and equitable
sharing of benefits.

                                                                         HUN SEN

                                                             ii
                                       PREFACE

 On behalf of the National Council for Sustainable Development and the Ministry of Environment, I
 would like to express my profound respect and sincere gratitude to Samdech Akka Moha Sena
 Padei Techo HUN SEN, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia, for his fu11 support and
 strong commitment to strengthen the contribution of biodiversity conservation and sustainable
 development. The National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan is the comprehensive strategic
 document for biodiversity conservation and management in Cambodia and represents an important
 milestone for the future under the charismatic leadership of Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei
 Techo HUN SEN, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia.

 I would like to express my deep gratitude to Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei Techo HUN SEN,
 Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia, and appreciation to Exce11encies, ladies and
 gentlemen from line departments, academies, NGOs, the private sector, and development partners
 for the good cooperation and support in the preparation and completion of the NBSAP updated.

The globa11y and regiona11y significant biodiversity values of Cambodia's rich natural resources are
an essential part of our country's natural capital. Few places on Earth demonstrate so dramatically
the fundamental link between people and nature: biodiversity supports Cambodians ecologica1Iy,
economica1ly, cultura11y and spiritua11y. For many poor forest-dependent communities, biodiversity
represents food security and livelihoods, crucial components of their weB-being and participation in
society.

Article 6 of the UN Convention on Biological Diversity (UN-CBD) demands the preparation of
National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP) by each signatory country and to ensure
that this strategy is mainstreamed into the planning and activities of a11 those sectors whose activities
can have an impact in both positive and negative on biodiversity. As a party to the Convention and
in fulfilment of its obligation, Cambodia had developed its NBSAP in 2002 and has used it as the
principal instruments for implementing the Convention at the national and sub national levels. While
the Global Biodiversity Strategic Plan 2011-2020 has been adopted by COP-1 0 in Nagoya, parties
are required to revise and update their NBSAP to reflect with this new international framework.
Cambodia, under support from Global Environmental Facility through UNEP has processed of
updating Cambodian NBSAP to use, protect and manage biodiversity for sustainable development in
Cambodia. This document serves as a roadmap for supporting the environmental component on
country's sustainable development.

The development of the NBSAP is based on a broad and inclusive consultation process to ensure
consensus, strategic cohesion and ownership of the Plan by relevant stakeholders. Much emphasis is
placed on building institutional capacity and knowledge to strengthen conservation management and

                                                                                          iii I Page

                                                      iii
enforcement, expand community livelihood opportunities, and support sustainable uses of
biodiversity. Collaboration at unprecedented levels will be required with other line Ministries, with
the private sector, with conservation NGOs and development partners to safeguard a biodiversity
conservation and sustainable management.
Mobilization of funding resources for the implementation of specific programmes and projects in
priority biodiversity conservation and action plan will be critical to achieve the goals and objectives
of the NBSAP.
I would like to take this opportunity to express my deep appreciation to Department of International
Convention and Biodiversity currently name as Department of Biodiversity, line departments and
agencies, development partners and experts for their valuable inputs, assistance and active
participation in the updating process of the NBSAP in a timely and effective

                                                            ...0.4...

                                                                 Minister o nvironment, and
                                     Chairman of National Council for Sustainable Development

                                                                                         iv I Page

                                                     iv
                                             ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

 The National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP) was developed under the overall coordination of the
 General Directorate of Administration for Nature Conservation and Protection of the Ministry of Environment, and
the General Secretariat of the National Council for Sustainable Development. It has been updated from the 2002
NBSAP to align with the global Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 and emerging issues of national
significance. This updated NBSAP is the result of efforts and commitments made by various government
institutions, academies, stakeholders, biodiversity specialists, conservation partners and non-governmental
agencies.

The General Secretariat of the National Council for Sustainable Development (NCSD)/Ministry of
Environment expresses its most sincere thanks and appreciation to H.E Say Samal, Minister of the
Environment and Chairman of the National Council for Sustainable Development, for his brilliant and
visionary leadership and initiatives on nationwide conservation and protection of natural resources, especially
biological diversity, which is part of the Royal Government's commitments to the Convention on Biological
Diversity, and for his constant encouragement and support towards the successful development and updating
of this strategic plan that will serve as the legal document for biodiversity management and conservation in
Cambodia. Special thanks are conveyed to H.E. Dr. Mok Mareth, former Minister of Environment and
former Chairman, and to members of National Biodiversity Steering Committee (NBSC)1 for their guidance
and advice. In particular, thanks to the Department of Biodiversity's staff (Department of International
Conventions and Biodiversity) for their valuable inputs and hard work in facilitating, coordinating and
engaging all the relevant stakeholders involved in the updating NBSAP process.

We would like to express our deep thanks for their support and encouragement to: H.E Chay Samith,
Delegate of the Royal Government of Cambodia in charge of the General Directorate of Administration for
Nature Conservation and Protection, H. E. Dr. Tin Ponlok, Secretary General of the National Council for
Sustainable Development, and H.E Ouk Seiha, Chairwoman of the multi-sectorial Technical Working Group
on NBSAP Updating (TWG-NBSAP). We also recognize the important work and significant support of the
members of the TWG-NBSAP.

We would like to express our sincere gratitude to the consultants Prof. Jo Mulongoy for drafting and editing
the strategic plan, Mr. Jady Smith, Mr. Ou Ratanak, and Mrs. Ly Vichuta for their inputs, and assisting
with data collection and compilation. Particular thanks to key staff of Department of Biodiversity for their
commitments and contributions to the whole preparation and updating of the NBSAP, especially Mr. Meng
Monyrak, Mrs. Ken Bopreang, Mr. Seng Rathea, and Mr. Yourk Sothearith for coordinating and
facilitating the process of stocktaking and technical inputs from relevant stakeholders. There has also been
direct support in providing information on ground activities, best practices, case studies, and biodiversity data
from biodiversity specialists, academia, and conservation partners including Mr. Neang Thy, Mr. Khou
Eanghourt, Mr. Chhang Phourin, Mr. Tan Setha and Mr. Uy Ching, the Royal University of Phnom Penh,
Fauna and Flora International, the Wildlife Conservation Society, the World Wildlife Fund, and Birdlife

1 National Biodiversity Steering Committee has been invalidated by Subdecree Jll 59

dated 18 May 2015 and merged into National Council for Sustainable Development

                                                                                     vi Page

v
International. Without the regular and effective involvement of these people, this document could not have
been comprehensive and produced in time.
We acknowledge with thanks all the contributors and stakeholders from relevant ministries, international
organizations, non-governmental organizations, local authorities and communities for their participation and
technical input in the formal and informal consultation processes, National Consultation Workshops, and
meetings toward the preparation and updating of this NBSAP.
We would like to convey our thanks to the Global Environment Facility (GEF) through the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) and the USAID funded Harvest Program (Mr. Matt Maltby) for financial
and technical supports towards the revision and updating of the NBSAP. Without the great support of many
partners it would have been difficult to complete the revision of the Cambodia's National Biodiversity Strategy
and Action Plan.
We would also like to thank the members of the Secretariat of the NBSC and all staffs of Department of
Biodiversity for their commitments, patience, hard and active work that led to the successful updating of the
NBSAP. Finally, I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to all the experts for their valuable time and
efforts in providing useful ideas and feedback during the preparation and updating process of National
Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan to support Cambodia's commitment to implement the three pillar
objectives of the UN Convention on Biological Diversity.

                                                                            Phnom Penh, 26 January 2016

                                                                            H.E Somaly CHAN
                                                                            Project Director, and
                                                                            Deputy Secretary General
                                                                            National Council for Sustainable Development/
                                                                            Ministry of Environment

                                                                                                  vi I Pag e

                                                              vi
National Biodiversity Steering Committee (NBSC)

H.E Say Samal       Minister, Ministry of Environment                          Chair
H.E Ty Sokun
H.E Lu Sim Eam      Secretary of State, Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Vice Chair
H.E Nuth Chansokha
H.E Ly Chana        Under Secretary of State, Ministry of Rural Development    Member
H.E Top Sopheak
H.E Tun Lean        Under Secretary of State, Ministry of Planning             Member
H.E Nhem Saran
H.E Tauch Sarou     Under Secretary of State, Ministry of Water Resources & Meteorology Member
H.E Koy Sodany
H.E Ly Chhoung      Under Secretary of State, Ministry of Tourism              Member
H.E Vong Sandap
H.E Te Navuth       Under Secretary of State, Ministry of Mines and Energy     Member

H.E Heng Soknang    Under Secretary of State, Ministry of Public Works and Transport Member

H.E Say Socheat     Under Secretary of State, Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport Member
H.E Kim Chhaihieng
H.E So Neak         Under Secretary of State, Ministry of Commerce             Member

                    Under Secretary of State, Ministry of Health               Member

                    Under Secretary of State, Ministry of Economy and Finance  Member

                    Secretary General, Cambodia National Mekong Committee      Member

                    Deputy Secretary General, Council for the Development of   Member
                    Cambodia

                    Deputy Governor, Koh Kong Province                         Member

                    Deputy Governor, Siem Reap Province                        Member

                    Deputy Governor, Ratanakiri Province                       Member

                    vii
Technical Working Group on NBSAP Updating

H.E Ouk Seiha                 Assistant to the Minister, Ministry of                Chair
H.E Chan Somaly               Environment
Mr. Ung Sam Oeun
                              Deputy Secretary General, National Council for        Vice Chair
Mr. Kim Chantharith           Sustainable Development (NCSD)                        Secretary
Mr. So Veasna
Mr. Chheang Dany              Deputy Director, Department of Administration,
                              Planning and Finance, General Secretariat of
Mr. Thuch Phanhchaksokhavith  National Council for Sustainable Development
Mr. Suon Sam Aun
                              Deputy Director, National Institute of Statistics of  Member
Mr. Ou Manira                 the Ministry of Planning                              Member
Mr. Bou Chan Serey                                                                  Member
Mr. Choun Vanna               Deputy Director, Department of New and
                              Renewable Energy, Ministry of Mines and Energy

                              Deputy Director, Department of Wildlife and
                              Biodiversity, Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry
                              and Fisheries

                              Deputy Chief of Office, Multilateral Cooperation      Member
                              2, Ministry of Economy and Finance                    Member

                              Chief of Administration Office, Department of         Member
                              Water Resource Management and Conservation,           Member
                              Ministry of Water Resources and Meteorology

                              Deputy Director, Department of Planning and
                              Public Relations, Ministry of Rural Development

                              Deputy Director General, Ministry of Tourism

                              Vice Chief of Science Office, Department of           Member
                              Curriculum Development, Ministry of Education,
                              Youth and Sport

                              viii
ABS               LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
ASAP
BCH     Access and Benefits Sharing
CBD     Asian Species Action Partnership
CBEA    Biosafety Clearing House
CBNRM   Convention on Biological Diversity
CCCSP   Cambodia Biodiversity Enabling Activity
CCD     Community-based natural resource management
CCTT    Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014 ­ 2023
CEPA    Climate Change Department
CHM     Climate Change Technical Team
CITES   Communication, Education and Public Awareness
CMDG    Clearing-House Mechanism
DEEC    Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna
EIA     Cambodia Millennium Development Goals
EFCMU
EMS     Department of Early Education and Care
FA
FiA     Environmental Impact Assessment
FLEG    Extension of the Forest Crime Monitoring Unit
GDM     Environmental Management Systems
GDANCP  Forestry Administration
GHG     Fisheries Administration
GMO     Forest Law Enforcement and Governance
GSSD    Green Development Mechanism
IBA     General Directorate of Administration for Nature Conservation and Protection
IBSC    Greenhouse gas
ICBD    Genetically Modified Organisms
IMSCEE  General Secretariat for Sustainable Development
IPM     Important Bird Areas
IUCN    Interministerial Biodiversity Steering Committee
KBA     International Conventions and Biodiversity Department
LDCF    Inter-ministerial Steering Committee on Environmental Education
LMAP    Integrated Pest Management
LMO     International Union for Conservation of Nature
MAFF    Key Biodiversity Areas
MCFA    Least Developed Countries Fund
MCR     Land Management and Administration Project
MEA     Living Modified Organism (resulting from modern biotechnology)
MEF     Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
MIH     Ministry of Culture and Fine Arts
MIME    Ministry of Cults and Religion
MLMUPC  Multilateral Environmental Agreement
MME     Ministry of Economy and Finance
MOC     Ministry of Industry and Handicraft
        Ministry of Industry, Mining and Energy, which is now MME
        Ministry of Land Management Urban Planning and Construction
        Ministry of Mine and Energy
        Ministry of Commerce

                             xiii
MOE      Ministry of Environment
MOEYS    Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport
MOH      Ministry of Health
MOI      Ministry of Interior
MOINF    Ministry of Information
MOLVT    Ministry of Labor and Vocational Training
MOP      Ministry of Planning
MOSVY    Ministry of Social Affairs, Veteran and Youth Rehabilitation
MOT      Ministry of Tourism
MOWRAM   Ministry of Water Resource and Meteorology
MPWT     Ministry of Public Works and Transport
MRD      Ministry of Rural Development
MOWA     Ministry of Womens Affairs
NCCC     National Climate Change Committee
NCDM     National Committee for Disaster Management
NCSD     National Council for Sustainable Development
NFP      National Forest Programme 2010 - 2029
NPASSMF  National Protected Area System Strategic Management Framework
NSDP     National Strategic Development Plan
NSDS     National Sustainable Development Strategy
PES      Payment for Ecosystem Services
PLUP     Participatory Land Use Planning
PRSP     Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
REDD     Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation
RGC      Royal Government of Cambodia
RUA      Royal University of Agriculture
RUPP     Royal University of Phnom Penh
SCCF     Special Climate Change Fund
SEA      Strategic Environmental Assessment
TK       Traditional Knowledge
TSA      Tonle Sap Authority
TWG      Technical Working Group
UNFCCC   United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change

         xiv
                                         EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Background

Cambodia relies predominantly on its rich biodiversity and other natural resources for its socioeconomic
development and for most peoples food, livelihoods and well-being. In the past decades, high population
growth and the increasing economic demands of this growing population have often led to the conversion
of natural forests to agriculture, to land degradation and pollution caused by unsustainable agriculture and
industries; they have led to habitat fragmentation from public works and urbanization; to the
overharvesting and overexploitation of resources particularly in forests, freshwaters and marine and
coastal areas. These pressures on biodiversity and its associated ecosystem services are often exacerbated
by the impact of climate change and more frequent natural disasters.

Cambodia has taken a number of measures to reduce biodiversity loss, in particular the designation of a
wide network of protected areas. However, limited financial resources and capacities in general,
combined with poor awareness of the value and vulnerability of ecosystems (of which the natural capital
is a part) have not allowed for an effective control of the drivers of biodiversity loss. This, of course, has
detrimental consequences for the countrys sustainable development.

In 1995, Cambodia acceded to the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD). As part of its fulfillment of
the obligations under this Convention, Cambodia adopted its National Biodiversity Strategy and Action
Plan (NBSAP) in 2002, aiming to achieve "equitable economic prosperity and improved quality of life
through sustainable use, protection and management of biological resources". The 2002 Strategy
emphasizes capacity-building, community involvement and intersectional cooperation.

Twelve years into the adoption of its NBSAP, Cambodia has noted progress in each of the 17 themes,
under which 81 strategic objectives and associated indicators were identified, as well as 98 priority
actions. Nevertheless, the overall impact of the NBSAP has been limited by inadequate human, financial
and institutional capacities, combined with insufficient knowledge and awareness of the value of
biodiversity, and an inadequate integration of biodiversity into policies and programmes dealing with
sustainable development and poverty reduction in the country.

In decision X/2 (para (c)) adopted at its 10th meeting in 2010, the CBD Conference of the Parties urged
Parties to review and, as appropriate, update and revise their NBSAPs in line with the Strategic Plan for
Biodiversity 2011-2020 adopted at that meeting, and with the guidance outlined in its decision IX/8. The
Aichi Biodiversity Target 17 reiterated this request in stating that "by 2015, each Party has developed,
adopted as a policy instrument, and has commenced implementing an effective, participatory and updated
national biodiversity strategy and action plan."

Cambodia initiated its review process in July 2012 and completed it in December 2015 under the
coordination of the General Directorate of Administration for Nature Conservation and Protection
(GDANCP), the General Secretariat of National Council for Sustainable Development (NCSD), and the
Ministry of Environment (MOE). In order to ensure a truly participatory approach in the review process
that would lead to the full ownership of the updated NBSAP and an effective engagement in the
implementation of the NBSAP, an inter-ministerial technical working group was invited to participate
actively in the consultations. This group consisted of representatives of 9 ministries and from other
government entities, local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities, the civil society and non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) each having a role and responsibilities in environmental
management in Cambodia.

An assessment of the implementation of the 2002 NBSAP and a Biodiversity Status Report were carried
out to take stock of the achievements derived from the implementation of the NBSAP, and to identify
obstacles, opportunities, as well as the countrys weaknesses and strengths in the implementation of the
NBSAP. These findings constitute important elements to be taken into consideration in updating the
NBSAP. In addition, laws, strategies and plans relating to biodiversity and sustainable development
adopted by Cambodia since 2002 were reviewed so as to ensure harmony, coherence, complementarity
and synergy between the updated NBSAP and all these approaches, strategies and plans, and to align with
the national development goals and priorities.

                                                    xv
Vision and mission

Cambodias vision for biodiversity is that, through this updated NBSAP and in support of the National
Strategic Development Plan, by 2050, Cambodias biodiversity and its ecosystem services are valued,
conserved, restored where necessary, wisely used and managed so as to ensure equitable economic
prosperity and improved quality of life for all in the country. The roadmap or mission for achieving this
vision consists of using, protecting and managing biodiversity for sustainable development in Cambodia.
This implies that biodiversity issues and values are mainstreamed into national development and sectoral
policies, plans and programmes; that biodiversity, our natural capital, is protected by reducing the various
direct and indirect pressures causing its loss or degradation, that it is used wisely so as to enhance the
benefits derived from it to the people of Cambodia, particularly in rural areas; and that an enabling
environment for the effective and efficient implementation of this mission is strengthened.

Framework strategic objectives and key actions

Cambodia adopted the following four overall strategic objectives for the realization of its NBSAPs
vision and mission:

     Strategic objective A: Identify, inventory, monitor and enhance awareness about genetic
     resources, species, habitats or ecosystems and related ecosystem services that are important for
     sustainable development and poverty eradication in Cambodia, as a priority for conservation
     and sustainable use;

     Strategic objective B: Identify and describe the direct and indirect factors and processes that
     are negatively impacting Cambodias priority biodiversity components; and apply, as
     appropriate, preventive and corrective measures;

     Strategic objective C: Maintain or strengthen measures that have a positive impact on
     biodiversity and thus enhance the benefits to all in Cambodia from biodiversity and associated
     ecosystem services, for an equitable economic prosperity and improved quality of life;

     Strategic objective D: Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation of the
     strategy.

Thirty-seven generic actions were identified for the achievement of the above overall strategic objectives
with the respective responsible Ministries, and other participating Ministries and agencies identified.

Through these strategic objectives and key actions, Cambodia decided to:

         (a) Adopt a step-by-step approach, taking into account the limited financial and human
               resources available, focusing initially on components of biodiversity that are important for
               sustainable development and poverty reduction, and those that are currently in danger of
               disappearance or irreversible degradation, or that could be subject to high risks in the near
               future. Knowledge about these priority components of biodiversity needs to be generated,
               compiled and included in education curricula. It needs to be disseminated in the media and
               taken into consideration in the governments discussions on laws, budgets, programmes and
               strategies, and it needs to be integrated into wider development programmes and strategies
               and in all the sectors;

         (b) Not only focus measures on the state of biodiversity, such as protected areas and
               programmes targeted at particular threatened or vulnerable species, or control direct drivers
               of biodiversity loss, but also focus on addressing the underlying causes of biodiversity loss.
               It will be possible to take the most appropriate measures to avert loss or degradation of
               biodiversity only when adequate information on the pressures and their impacts is available.
               Other important focus areas include: participatory planning; the involvement of all groups of
               stakeholders including local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities in the spirit of
               decentralization to the lowest appropriate level for greater efficiency, effectiveness and
               equity engrained in the Rectangular Strategy; adaptive, effective and equitable management;
               and the use of the ecosystem approach and ecosystem or landscape­based approaches,
               biodiversity-inclusive strategic environmental assessments and environmental impact
               assessments, and guidelines for the sustainable use of biodiversity, such as the Addis Ababa
               Principles and Guidelines for the Sustainable Use of Biodiversity or the FAO Technical
               Guidelines for Responsible Fisheries, will characterize all the measures taken for the

                                                   xvi
               protection of biological resources, the recovery of threatened species, restoration of degraded
               ecosystems important for peoples lives, and sustainable agriculture, aquaculture, fisheries,
               forestry, landscape management, public works and industrial development;

         (c) Highlight, as often as possible, success stories from measures taken, emphasizing in
               particular the supply of essential services, including services related to water, health, food
               security, climate change adaptation, resistance and resilience to land degradation or natural
               disasters and, in general, services related to livelihoods and the well-being of all in
               Cambodia. In doing so, awareness about the benefits from measures taken will be increased
               and will support biodiversity conservation and sustainable use;

         (d) Explore incentives put forward in various other strategies such as the National Green Growth
               Roadmap adopted in 2009 and the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the
               Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization (ratified in 2015).
               These positive incentives will sustain conservation and sustainable use initiatives by
               contributing to the change in attitudes and behaviors of people towards biodiversity and its
               associated ecosystem services;

         (e) Consider sustainable financing of the NBSAP as one of the priorities, so as to address the
               lack of financial resources, which is one of the key constraints identified during the
               implementation of the 2002 NBSAP;

         (f) Address the needs for enhanced financial, human, institutional capacities as cutting across
               many strategies, plans and sectors in a coordinated manner for efficiency. In this perspective
               and in line with the recommendations from the National Capacity Self-Assessment,
               Cambodia intends to (i) mainstream biodiversity considerations in the on-the-ground
               implementation of all the relevant policies, strategies, plans and programmes already
               adopted, and more specifically by integrating biodiversity into key economic development
               sectors, into development planning, policy and legal reforms beyond environment; and (ii)
               address biodiversity, due to its complexity and wide scope, using interdisciplinary, cross-
               sectoral and multi-scale approaches.

These strategic objectives and choices are in line with the strategic goals of the Aichi Biodiversity Targets
and support the development goals adopted by the Royal Government of Cambodia in the Rectangular
Strategy for Growth, Employment, Equity and Efficiency in Cambodia. These strategic objectives and
choices are also in line with the provisions in the National Strategic Development Plan 2009-2013 and the
National Green Growth Roadmap 2013-2030. The implementation of these strategic objectives is
expected to meet most of the environmental quality objectives proposed in the National Sustainable
Development Strategy (2009), such as productive land resources, rich forest resources, high quality
ground and surface water resources, rich fish resources, functional wetlands, sustainable marine and
coastal environment, rich biodiversity, limited influence on the climate, efficient use of natural resources,
limited waste generation, limited impact from natural disasters, and clean air.

Implementation of the 2002 NBSAP: lessons learned and outcomes

The 2002 National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan proposed a series of strategic objectives and
priority actions that were addressed under 17 themes corresponding to important sectors in Cambodia.
Overall, there has been good progress in the implementation of the 2002 NBSAP, but that has been
limited mainly by insufficient knowledge of the status, trends and future dynamic of biodiversity
components and ecosystem services; limited quantitative knowledge of the value of biodiversity in
Cambodia and of the various anthropogenic pressures; by the fact that most of the research activities were
externally driven; and insufficient financial resources. These and many other constraints encountered
during the implementation of the 2002 NBSAP are addressed in the updated NBSAP.

Status of biodiversity in Cambodia

The national biodiversity status assessment was undertaken to describe the status and trends of
Cambodias biodiversity. However, due to the time and resources available, only an overview was
possible. The assessment highlighted significant gaps in data and coordination, as well as the strength for

                                                  xvii
future assessments such as the RUPP Masters in Conservation, Centre for Biodiversity Conservation and
the Cambodian Journal of Natural History, with the support of the national clearing-house mechanism.

No systematic assessment of plant and animal genetic resources was carried out before or after the
adoption of the NBSAP in 2002. There is now a positive trend toward an increased understanding of
genetic diversity and the importance for conservation, but there is still limited use for domestic and
commercial plants and animals. Recently, DNA was used for crocodile and elephant research.

The recent inventory in Cambodia indicates a diversity of 162 mammal species across both terrestrial and
marine systems, 601 bird species with 7 on the new global Evolutionally Distinct and Globally
Endangered (EDGE) list, 1357 fish species across both fresh and salt water systems, 173 reptile species,
72 amphibian species, 671 invertebrates, and 3113 plant species. The observed trend in diminishing fish
species diversity is a result of unsustainable harvest; and this drop in fish species diversity is likely to
become exacerbated by the increased damming of the Mekong and its tributaries. Regarding species
diversity, the general trend shows an increasing understanding of species diversity, where the most
significant gaps in knowledge center around amphibian and plant species. Ongoing studies also identify
potential extinctions. In terms of ecosystem diversity, the overall trend indicates a shift toward an
increased human use of ecosystems; that is increasing agricultural, commercial and extractive use. The
Ministry of Environment has started to highlight ecosystems and their services, but more work is needed
especially regarding vulnerable ecosystems.

National actions for implementing the overall objectives of the NBSAP: thematic approach and
national biodiversity targets

Thematic approach

Similarly to the 2002 NBSAP, a sectoral approach was used to identify the priority actions required for
achieving the vision, mission and overall strategic objectives of this updated NBSAP under the following
themes: the 17 themes in the 2002 NBSAP and the new themes on (i) mining, (ii) access and benefit-
sharing, (iii) customary sustainable use and traditional knowledge, (iv) manufacturing industries, (v)
resource mobilization, (vi) landscape and seascape management and (vii) clearing-house mechanism for
technical and scientific cooperation. The 24 themes were regrouped under (i) Protection of biodiversity:
themes 1 to 8 (Group 1); (ii) Sustainable use of biodiversity: themes 9 to 16 (Group 2); and (iii) Enabling
environment: themes 17 to 24 (Group 3).

Each theme is introduced with an account of: the issues taken into consideration in the 2002 NBSAP, a
brief overview of the results of the actions identified in that NBSAP, followed by a list of current key
issues based essentially on the findings in the Fifth National Report, the assessment of the implementation
of the 2002 NBSAP, and the Biodiversity Status Report. Additional sources of issues include national
reports and communications prepared under the other Rio conventions and other biodiversity-related
multilateral environmental agreements (MEAs), and various reports on the implementation of relevant
national strategies and plans, such as the report on the Cambodia Millennium Development Goals and
reports submitted to funding agencies.

The overall strategic objectives and key actions were used as checklists to develop strategic objectives
and identify key actions under these thematic strategic objectives. The overall strategic objectives and key
actions will also serve as checklists whenever a new ecosystem (e.g., urban ecosystem) or a specific
landscape/seascape (e.g., the socio-ecological production landscapes and seascapes under the Satoyama
Initiative) is found important for inclusion as a new theme in the NBSAP. A list of leading and
participating ministries and agencies is provided along with each action. Complementarities and possible
synergies with actions from other themes and possible links to the Cambodia Biodiversity Targets are
highlighted to ensure efficiency during the implementation of each action and avoid unnecessary
duplications.

Theme 1: Protected area system

Cambodia's protected area system (currently 26% of the countrys land-which is beyond the 17%
terrestrial coverage of the Aichi biodiversity target) has a great potential to become a major contributor to
the country's economy and sustainable development, including poverty reduction, through the
conservation and sustainable use of its biological, natural and cultural resources and other ecosystem
services. However, Cambodias protected area system is under a lot of pressure. The majority of the

                                                  xviii
designated protected areas and conservation areas are ineffective and there are obstacles to the
establishment of new protected areas and conservation areas where they are required.

Under this theme, the goals of the strategic objectives and key actions are to (i) generate information on
species ranges, status and trends; on the value, role, status and functioning of protected areas under MOE,
and of conservation areas under MAFF, and their network, and compile information in user-friendly
databases; (ii) ensure that Cambodia implements its biodiversity conservation commitments under the
MEAs (in particular the CBD, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the United
Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, the World Heritage Convention and the Ramsar
Convention on Wetlands). These commitments are reiterated in the plan of action on protected areas in
this NBSAP, and its targets in the Cambodia Millennium Development Goals, the National Forest
Programme Strategy and other strategic documents; (iii) implement well-coordinated measures for the
effective protection of natural habitats and vulnerable ecosystems, including in particular coral reefs,
Important Bird Areas (IBAs) and Key Biodiversity Areas (KBAs), while deriving environmental and
socioeconomic benefits; the protection of areas that are naturally resilient to climate change and could
thus serve as climate refugia; the protection and recovery of threatened species; and the sustainable use of
biological resources within protected areas and conservation areas; and (iv) implement the 2008 Protected
Area Law and related laws.

The success in implementing the strategic objectives and key actions under this theme and all the
following themes depends greatly on the enabling conditions and how the country will strengthen its
capability and engagement.

Theme 2: Threatened species

The strategic objectives and key actions under this theme will focus on the need to (i) identify species of
fauna and flora that are threatened, and on improving knowledge about their status and trends, as well as
the threats and socioeconomic consequences of losing these species, (ii) describe the status and trends of
species vulnerability in the face of climate change. They will also provide some guidance on ways and
means to improve the status of threatened species, including through the establishment of in-situ
conservation facilities (see theme 1); rescue, recovery and reintroduction programmes; the rehabilitation
and restoration of degraded habitats; and the prevention and control of invasive alien species.

Theme 3: Ex-situ conservation

The strategic objectives and key actions under this theme were put forward to develop and strengthen ex-
situ conservation facilities, such as herbariums, and botanical and zoological gardens also devoted to
research and training, in complementarity with in-situ conservation measures under the previous themes.

Theme 4: Sustainable mining

Mining is a sector with great economic potential in Cambodia. When managed effectively and properly, it
can significantly contribute to poverty reduction and assist in meeting the countrys development goals.
However, currently many mining operations are destroying natural ecosystems and are creating water
pollution that is having severe impacts on downstream watercourses and the surrounding communities.
The strategic objectives and key actions under this theme were put forward to develop mining into a
sustainable sector, one that is keeping in line with the mining law and the 2030 vision of the National
Sustainable Development Strategy (NSDS). Based on the NSDS 2030 vision, mining should be a sector
that exploits minerals without destroying nearby human settlements and landscapes, and without causing
serious health and environmental impacts. It should be a sector that economizes the scarce mineral
resources and promotes the recycling of metals. Strategically, the ecological and socioeconomic impact of
mineral resource exploration, extraction and processing on the status and trends of biodiversity
components and functions will be assessed; awareness about this impact will be enhanced; preventive and
corrective measures, including ecosystem restoration, will be developed and applied, as appropriate; and
the contribution of mining resources to biodiversity conservation, poverty reduction, sustainable
development and the well-being of all in Cambodia will be increased.

Theme 5: Environmental security

The presence of land mines does not allow for the establishment of legal conservation programmes in
those insecure mined zones. In addition, natural disasters (in particular floods) cause serious damage to
infrastructure and ecosystems, especially agro-ecosystems. They disrupt social and economic activities.

                                                   xix
Strategic objectives and key actions under this theme will allow the gathering of relevant information and
data, on the basis of which preventive, proactive and corrective measures will be designed and applied.

Theme 6: Sustainable land-use planning

The key to successful projects and programmes is planning. The strategic objectives and key actions
under this theme include (i) the inventory of ongoing land-use planning activities, (ii) an assessment of
their effectiveness, and (iii) the development of a national land-use master plan, and provincial and
community-based land-use plans based essentially on the identification of areas where land-use planning
is needed to ensure conservation of biodiversity, the sustainable use of its components, and contribution
to sustainable development and poverty eradication. The experiences accumulated in the country and
elsewhere will provide a basis for the development of guidelines for land-use planning, building on the
ecosystem approach and similar approaches, so as to optimize the use of the resources found in the
country and their social, environmental and economic benefits.

Theme 7: Sustainable water resources

Water resources are an essential component of the nations environment and natural resource base. A long
dry season and pollution from various sources limit the amount and quality of water available for human
consumption, agriculture and other uses, and aquatic life. This theme is about managing waters in a
sustainable manner, in line with the 2007 Law on Water Resources Management of the Kingdom of
Cambodia and related sub-decrees. This theme is also in harmony with the NSDS 2030 vision regarding
sustainable supply of water, by applying measures that will maintain water resources quality and quantity
suitable for human consumption, and for use in agriculture, livestock and industries, and by reducing the
effects of flooding and droughts on water supply and quality through a combination of preventive and
adaptation measures.

Theme 8: Biodiversity and climate change

Cambodia is among the countries most vulnerable to climate change in Southeast Asia, owing to its high
dependency on climate-sensitive sectors such as agriculture, water resources, forestry, fisheries and
tourism; all of which form the foundation of its economic growth and support the livelihoods of a great
majority of its population. Climate change is one of the most important drivers of biodiversity loss in the
country; for this reason biodiversity conservation and sustainable use can contribute to climate change
adaptation and mitigation. Strategic objectives and key actions under this theme aim to (i) assess the
present and projected impact of climate change and climate change mitigation or adaptation measures on
genetic resources, species, ecosystems and related ecosystem services, and on sectors depending primarily
on biodiversity in particular agriculture, fisheries and livestock. Measures taken include the creation,
expansion and restoration of effectively managed protected areas (see Theme 1 above); (ii) assess and
document the role of biodiversity in climate change mitigation and adaptation measures, and strengthen
biodiversity conservation measures that have a positive impact on climate change mitigation and
adaptation; and (iii) minimize the anthropogenic pressures (such as pollution, exploitation and
sedimentation) on ecosystems that are vulnerable to climate change, so as to maintain their integrity,
functioning and resilience.

Theme 9: Sustainable forestry

Cambodia has one of the highest levels of forest cover in Southeast Asia. Forest ecosystems support
biodiversity and provide countless services, resources and functions that are important for the livelihoods
and wellbeing of the people in Cambodia, as well as for wildlife, for Cambodias economy, and for
mitigating climate change. Sustainable forest management characterizes the management of
socioecological production landscapes in the country. There is a general concern over the human impact
on forest health and on the natural processes of forest growth and regeneration; human activities of
particular concern include illegal logging activities and inappropriate forest subproduct collection,
including land clearing for agriculture and ownership. Under this theme, the strategic objectives and key
actions are about (i) identifying, making inventory, monitoring and enhancing awareness about forest
genetic resources, species, ecosystems and related ecosystem services that are important for sustainable
development and poverty eradication in Cambodia; (ii) assessing the direct and indirect factors and
processes that are negatively impacting Cambodias forest resources and forest functions; and applying,
as appropriate, preventive and corrective measures, taking into account the 2002 Law on Forestry; and
(iii) strengthening measures that have a positive impact on forest biodiversity and that enhance the

                                                    xx
benefits from forest resources and, in general, forest ecosystems, for all in Cambodia, in line with the
NSDS 2030 vision for forests.

Theme 10: Sustainable freshwater fisheries and aquaculture

Fisheries play a significant role in supplying Cambodians with food, as well as in supporting the national
economy. Fisheries, however, are subject to a significant amount of anthropogenic pressure that is leading
to a decline in fish stocks and in the size of fish caught. The strategic objectives and key actions under
this theme are about (i) identifying, taking inventory, monitoring and enhancing awareness about
freshwater resources including fish varieties used in aquaculture; (ii) developing and implementing
management plans containing preventive and corrective measures to address the major direct and indirect
factors and processes that are impacting Cambodias freshwater fisheries and aquaculture negatively,
while enforcing the 2006 Law on Fisheries, developing post-harvest fish processing, and promoting
national and export markets for harvested and processed fish; and (iii) maintaining or strengthening
measures that have a positive impact on freshwater fisheries and aquaculture, so as to enhance the
benefits to all in Cambodia.

Theme 11: Sustainable coastal and marine resources management

The coastal and marine area of Cambodia is ecologically and biologically rich, but under a lot of pressure.
Strategically, key actions under this theme aim to (i) monitor and gather information for awareness-
raising on coastal and marine resources; and (ii) develop management plans containing preventive and
corrective measures to control identified direct and indirect factors and processes that are negatively
impacting Cambodias coastal and marine resources, and measures that will sustain benefits from the
effective management of coastal and marine resources.

Theme 12: Sustainable animal wildlife resources management

Cambodia is host to a great diversity of animal life of significant importance in the lives of the people and
for the functioning of ecosystems. Reports indicate that Cambodia is losing its unique and valuable
wildlife genetic pool. The strategic objectives and key actions under this theme include (i) identifying,
taking inventory, monitoring and enhancing awareness about animal wildlife resources; (ii) strengthening
taxonomic and ecological work including on invasive alien animal species and (iii) applying preventive
and corrective measures based on identified direct and indirect factors and processes that are negatively
impacting Cambodias animal wildlife resources.

Theme 13: Sustainable agriculture and animal production

Cambodias economy is largely based on agriculture; with livestock production on an increase. In order to
respond to the high and ever-increasing food demands, while avoiding further conversion of forestland to
agriculture, the country needs to take environmentally friendly measures to increase agricultural
productivity and efficiency, food processing and marketing. This needs to be done in line with the laws,
strategies and plans adopted since 2002 relating to agriculture and animal production, and more
specifically to the unmet 2015 targets contained in the 2009 NSDS. It is therefore necessary, under this
theme, to strategically (i) identify, inventory, monitor and enhance awareness about agricultural
biodiversity, including the animal component; (ii) apply preventive and corrective measures by
addressing the direct and indirect factors and processes that are negatively impacting Cambodias
agricultural biodiversity, as well as its agricultural and animal production. In order to achieve this, the
agricultural sector needs to be broadened to thereby attract more quality investments in agri-business and
improve agricultural trade linkages, land reform, agricultural diversification and agro-processing; and (iii)
strengthen measures that have a positive impact on agriculture and animal production, and thus ensure
food security for all, particularly for the rural community.

Theme 14: Sustainable Energy Resources Management

Over 84% of Cambodian households meet their energy needs through fuelwood, which accounts for
approximately 70% of the total national energy demand. The domestic use of fuelwood and charcoal
commonly requires heavy forest logging, which generates indoor/outdoor air pollution and creates severe
environmental problems. Energy supply in Cambodia also relies heavily on imported fuels. The country is
exploring new sources of energy, including hydropower, offshore and onshore oil and gas, and renewable
energy to respond to the increasing energy demand. Under this theme, the following key strategic actions
have been identified to (i) assess the energy needs, and launch inventory and monitoring programmes for

                                                   xxi
energy biomass, (ii) enhance awareness about the contribution of biodiversity to the countrys energy
needs, and (iii) identify and apply ways and means to increase this contribution in a sustainable way,
while reducing the impacts of energy production and consumption on biodiversity components, as well as
on local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities.

Theme 15: Access and Benefit-Sharing

Cambodia signed the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable
Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity in 2012, and
translated it into Khmer language. The country became Party in April 2015. Under this theme, the key
actions are articulated around the strategic objectives of developing and implementing national access and
benefits-sharing (ABS) policy and legislation, and strengthening relevant communication, education and
public awareness programmes.

Theme 14: Customary sustainable use and traditional knowledge

For centuries, indigenous peoples and local communities have accumulated substantial knowledge
relevant to sustainable resource use and management, and to the conservation of biodiversity in their
traditional territories. They have been able to adapt this knowledge to changes in environmental, social,
economic and political conditions, as needed, and within the ecosystem limits. Indigenous peoples and
local communities are therefore well placed to adapt to changing conditions such as climate change, and
to contribute to strengthening the resilience of the social and ecological systems, as well as the generation
of new knowledge. The strategic objectives and key actions under this theme aim to (i) ensure that
biodiversity customary sustainable use practices and traditional knowledge are valued, respected,
protected and considered as useful and necessary for the implementation of the NBSAP; (ii) support and
strengthen community-based initiatives that contribute to the conservation and sustainable use of
biodiversity; and (iii) ensure that traditional knowledge and customary sustainable use of biodiversity are
applied with the active involvement and effective participation of relevant indigenous ethnic minorities
and local communities.

Theme 17: Industry, Technology and Services

This theme consists of three sub-themes: (i) Sustainable manufacturing industry management, (ii)
Biotechnology and biosafety, and (iii) Sustainable tourism.

         (a) Strategic objectives and key actions for the manufacturing industry are about (i) assessing
               the impact of manufacturing industries on components of biodiversity and related ecosystem
               services that are important for sustainable development and poverty reduction in Cambodia;
               and (ii) preventing and, as needed, reducing possible negative impacts of manufacturing
               industries on Cambodias important biodiversity components, taking into account the
               products life cycles and possible restoration measures;

         (b) Strategic objectives and key actions for biotechnology and biosafety were articulated around
               the National Action Plan on Biosafety and Biotechnology developed in 2008 under the CBD,
               in the context of the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety and its Strategic Plan, having in mind
               that these activities have to contribute to the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity,
               sustainable development and poverty reduction in Cambodia;

         (c) Strategic objectives and key actions for tourism aim to (i) gather biodiversity information of
               relevance to tourism development, including taking inventory of nature based-tourism sites;
               (ii) prevent tourism activities from impacting biodiversity negatively and, as needed, apply
               corrective measures where tourism has a negative impact on Cambodias important
               biodiversity components, and (iii) strengthen measures relating to tourism that have a
               positive impact on biodiversity and thus enhance the benefits to all in Cambodia from
               biodiversity and associated ecosystem services.

Theme 18: Resource mobilization

This theme is about strategic ways and means to mobilize resources needed to advance the conservation
of biodiversity and the sustainable use of its components, so as to achieve sustainable development,
poverty reduction and the well-being of the people in Cambodia. Resource mobilization includes the
building or strengthening of human capacities, mobilization of financial resources from diverse sources
including GEF, the strengthening and enhanced coordination of institutions, acquisition and use of new

                                                  xxii
technologies, introduction of positive economic incentives, enhanced engagement of the business sector
and other stakeholders, and equitable sharing of benefits from the utilization of genetic resources.
Building on various ongoing initiatives such as the implementation of recommendations from the
National Capacity Self-Assessment (NCSA) report or the development of a biodiversity strategy for
resource mobilization under the CBD, resource mobilization is essential for enabling the implementation of all
the actions identified in the NBSAP.

Theme 19:Community participation

Community participation implies the regular involvement of members of the communities in natural
resources planning, decision- and policy-making, implementation, monitoring and reporting processes
through multi-stakeholder consultations. More specifically, the success in implementing conservation and
sustainable use of biological resources and ecosystem services will require the effective participation of
local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities who depend directly on biodiversity. The strategic
objective under this theme is about putting in place ways and means to enhance effective and efficient
community participation in natural resource management including by building environmental awareness,
understanding and empowerment, particularly in rural communities, and by ensuring that legal and
institutional frameworks support communities' rights to use and protect their resources.

Theme 20: Awareness, education, and research coordination and development

This theme is another critical element of the enabling cluster and as such it constitutes a key component
of every theme. Increasing public awareness and the understanding of the importance of biodiversity, as
well as acquiring expertise and know-how are essential elements in guaranteeing the effectiveness of the
measures to achieve the conservation and sustainable use of the natural capital sustaining life and human
well-being in Cambodia. To be efficient, awareness and education activities have to be supported by
adequate scientific research and documentation. For efficiency and enhanced synergy, and in the
framework of the ecosystem approach or similar approaches, research being carried out by various bodies
within the government, by knowledge institutions and non-governmental organisations needs
coordination to take full advantage of complementarities and synergies.

Theme 21: Legislation and institutional structure

Since 2002, Cambodia has passed several new laws and sub-decrees and ratified international and
regional agreements of great relevance to biodiversity. The strategic objectives and key actions under this
theme focus on (i) promoting an effective, coherent and synergistic implementation of policies and
legislations relating to biodiversity. This will be achieved through the support of an effective national
clearing-house mechanism and through the strengthening of the National Biodiversity Steering
Committee and other interministerial structures established in accordance with the various laws and
policies that govern directly or indirectly the conservation and sustainable use of biological resources and
ecosystems; (ii) strengthening existing national and regional institutions addressing biodiversity issues
through financial support, capacity building and public awareness programmes, so as to ensure an
effective enforcement of the laws and guarantee mutual reinforcement and a more efficient use of the
available resources; and (iii) establishing and supporting new institutions such as for the implementation
of the Nagoya Protocol, and the acquisition and adaptation of technology of relevance to biodiversity
conservation and sustainable use.

Theme 22: Quality of life and poverty reduction

Cambodia has been addressing poverty reduction and improvement of the quality of life both at the policy
and macro-economic levels and at the level of direct interventions focused on the poorest populations in
rural areas. The strategies adopted are typically social and economic responses; however, they need to be
developed to take biodiversity considerations into account. Under this theme, only the role of biodiversity
is considered. Biodiversity is essential for human well-being through ecosystem provisioning, regulating,
cultural and supporting services. The strategic objectives and key actions under this theme focus on (i)
enhancing the contribution of biodiversity conservation, the sustainable use of its components and the fair
and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilisation of genetic resources to poverty reduction and
the Cambodia Millennium/Sustainable Development Goals; (ii) strengthening the enabling environment
for the implementation of biodiversity actions that will enhance the quality of life for all in Cambodia and
contribute to poverty reduction; and (iii) ensuring that the social and infrastructural changes being made
to improve the lives of people in Cambodia and economic growth have no detrimental impacts in the long

                                                  xxiii
term on biodiversity and the rural communities. Actions considered under all the themes of this strategy
will contribute to the achievement of poverty reduction and to the maintenance of a high quality of life in
Cambodia.

Theme 23: Landscape and seascape management and coordination

The ecosystem approach, under the CBD, is the primary framework for the management of biodiversity.
Since the definition of ,,ecosystem approach does not specify any particular spatial unit or scale, some
organizations have put forward other approaches in line with the ecosystem approach, such as the
landscape approach, that are more familiar to people working on the ground. The Interministerial
Technical Working Group decided to include this theme in the national biodiversity strategy to ensure that
the complexity of biodiversity management, the interactions among habitats within landscapes/seascapes
and the many interests from various stakeholders are taken into consideration and are well coordinated for
efficiency and synergistic conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity components. An illustration of
the objectives and actions planned under this theme can be found in the management of socio-ecological
production landscapes within the Satoyama initiative.

Theme 24: Clearing-house mechanism for technical and scientific cooperation, knowledge sharing
             and information exchange

Limited relevant information for policy and decision-making, the difficult accessibility when information
is available, and the limited capability of the existing national clearing-house mechanism have led to the
development of strategic objectives and key actions that would (i) improve access to and generate
information, including in Khmer language; (ii) improve the use of available information and knowledge;
and (iii) increase availability of financial, technical and human resources for the clearing-house
mechanism.

Cambodia Biodiversity 2015-2020 Targets

Cambodias updated NBSAP consists of 498 key actions identified to achieve 78 strategic objectives
under 24 themes. It is necessary to implement these actions to realize the vision of this NBSAP. With a
view to streamlining the NBSAP implementation, the Interministerial Technical Working Group defined
20 specific and time-bound targets, some of which are also measurable, to be achieved before or by 2020.
Specific actions, essentially drawn from the key actions under the NBSAP themes, are listed as well as
indicators of progress towards the achievement of each target. Many of the actions have already been
adopted as part of strategies and plans for sustainable development and various sectoral plans and
programmes. In addition, linkages between targets are highlighted so that implementation can be as
efficient as possible.

The Cambodia Biodiversity 2015-2020 Targets can therefore be seen as a platform that will promote
coherence, coordination, cooperation, co-evolution and synergy while maximizing resource use and
efficiency in implementing the key actions. The targets will facilitate, in particular, cooperation and
creation of concrete collaborative programmes between different Ministries and their Departments,
different actors within and across economic sectors, and among organizations at the national, regional and
international levels.

Cambodia Biodiversity 2015-2020 Targets are:

           Target 1 (Aichi Target 1): By 2020, every Cambodian is conscious about the environmental,
           economic, health, social and cultural value of the services derived from ecosystems, and
           integrates this knowledge in the way they deal with these ecosystems and resources;

           Target 2 (Aichi Target 20): By 2020, at the latest, the national budget allocation for biodiversity
           conservation and sustainable use (including NBSAP implementation) has increased by 20%
           through the development and implementation of a resource mobilization strategy;

           Target 3 (Aichi Target 2): By 2020, at the latest, biodiversity values have been integrated into
           national and sub-national development and poverty reduction strategies and planning processes;

           Target 4 (Aichi Target 6): By 2020, freshwater fisheries and aquaculture are managed
           sustainably by addressing their constraints, and by reducing and preventing their possible
           negative impact on fish stocks and on aquatic threatened species and vulnerable ecosystems;

                                                  xxiv
Target 5 (Aichi Target 7): By 2020 the majority of areas under agriculture, animal production,
aquaculture and forestry are managed sustainably;

Target 6 (Aichi Target 14): By 2020, 10% of the protected areas, conservation areas, agro-
ecosystems and forest ecosystems including mangroves, that have been under a lot of pressures
in recent years are in an advanced state of restoration and are providing enhanced services,
particularly to women, elders and children in local communities and indigenous ethnic minority
groups;

Target 7 (Aichi Target 4): By 2020, the Government, the private sector and other stakeholders
have taken steps to reduce the negative impacts on ecosystems and their services caused by
unsustainable production and consumption activities;

Target 8 (Aichi Target 11): In 2020, at the latest, existing protected areas and conservation
areas, including community-based natural resource management areas, have management plans
and have started effective implementation.

By 2020,

  (i) The coverage of marine and coastal protected areas and freshwater protected areas has at
       least doubled as compared to the 2010 levels;

  (ii) Currently the unprotected areas of particular importance for biodiversity and ecosystem
       services that are under a lot of to pressures from human activities are identified and
       integrated in the protected area system; and

 (iii) Protected areas and conservation areas have been valued, are part of a well-connected
       protected area system and have been integrated in national sustainable development goals
       and national green growth strategies, plans and programmes;

By 2029, protected forest covers 3.0 million hectares, in line with the objectives of the National
Forest Programme 2010-2029;

Target 9 (Aichi Target 3): By 2020, Payment for Ecosystem Services (PES) is used throughout
the country as an incentive for the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity;

Target 10 (Aichi Target 12): By 2020, all species of fauna and flora threatened at the national
level have been identified and their status has been improved significantly as a result of
applying measures to address their respective threats;

Target 11 (Aichi Target 15): By 2020, ecosystem resilience and the contribution of biodiversity
to carbon stocks have been enhanced through the conservation and restoration of degraded
ecosystems, focusing in particular on degraded forests, protected areas and conservation areas,
thereby contributing to climate change mitigation and adaptation and to combating
desertification;

Target 12 (Aichi Target 5): By 2020, the rate of loss of natural forests, coral reefs and other
natural habitats is at least halved; and habitat degradation and fragmentation, pollution,
overharvesting, introduction of invasive alien species and their impacts are significantly
reduced;

Target 13 (Aichi Target 16): By 2015, Cambodia has designated a national focal point and one
or more competent national authorities for the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources
and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization (ABS), and
established a functional ABS Clearing-House as part of the clearing-house mechanism;

By 2020, Cambodia has developed and is enforcing a legislation and national policies on access
to genetic resources and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from their utilization;

Target 14 (Aichi Target 17): By 2015, the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan
(NBSAP) have been updated and adopted, and have commenced to be implemented effectively;

Target 15 (Aichi Target 10): By 2020, anthropogenic pressures (pollution, exploitation,
sedimentation...) on coral reefs and vulnerable ecosystems impacted by climate change have been
significantly reduced;

                                        xxv
           Target 16 (Aichi Target 8): By 2020, pollutant pressures on terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems
           are substantially reduced to levels that are not detrimental to ecosystem function and
           biodiversity;

           Target 17 (Aichi Target 18): By 2020, the traditional knowledge, innovations and practices of
           indigenous ethnic minorities and local communities relevant for the conservation and
           sustainable use of biodiversity, and their customary use of biological resources, are:

                 (a) respected, subject to national legislation and relevant international obligations, and
                 (b) fully integrated and reflected in the implementation of the Convention and the

                       NBSAP, with the full and effective participation of these communities at all relevant
                       levels;

           Target 18 (Aichi Target 9): By 2020, major invasive alien species (IAS) and their pathways
           have been identified and prioritized, and prioritized IAS and pathways are controlled;

           Target 19 (Aichi Target 19): By 2020, an interoperable and user-friendly information system
           containing data and information on biodiversity (including its associated ecosystem services)
           values, functions, status and trends, and threats, and the consequences of its loss has been
           established and maintained in the responsible institutions for wide sharing among stakeholders;

           Target 20 (Aichi Target 13): By 2020, the genetic diversity of cultivated plants and farmed and
           domesticated animals, as well as the genetic diversity of their wild relatives is protected and conserved
           in-situ and ex-situ.

Monitoring, evaluation and reporting

Monitoring and evaluation are critical components of the NBSAP and are useful in reporting on
implementation progress and the outcomes of measures taken. In addition, monitoring and evaluation
allow an adaptive management capability to be mainstreamed in the strategy and ensure the flexible
nature that characterizes effective and efficient NBSAPs. While monitoring should be a continuous
process, so that it can detect unexpected changes requiring urgent attention, reporting can be done
annually and, necessarily, in response to the obligations already agreed upon by Cambodia, such as the
submission of national reports under the MEAs or obligations vis-a-vis a funding agency. Agreed sets of
indicators and baselines, and a common timetable for reporting, building on ongoing initiatives in the
relevant ministries and sectors, are essential for promoting coordinated monitoring and evaluation of the
NBSAP implementation.

Monitoring, evaluation and reporting require the establishment and strengthening of relevant institutional
and technological capacities, and adequate human and financial resources.

Support mechanisms for implementation

According to Aichi Biodiversity Target 17, updated NBSAPs have to be adopted as a policy instrument,
by the government as a whole and for all the sectors, and their implementation should start effectively and
in a participatory manner by 2015.

Ministry of Environment and the National Biodiversity Steering Committee2

As a starting point in the implementation of the NBSAP, MOE will mandate and support the National
Biodiversity Steering Committee (NBSC), serving as the steering committee for the NBSAP, to work on
clarifying ministerial jurisdictions and the roles and responsibilities of various institutional actors. This
exercise will identify ways and means to reduce responsibility overlaps, while promoting coordination,
collaboration and synergy in an ecosystem approach or landscape / seascape perspective. The NBSC will
describe, in concrete details, its strategy for promoting the engagement of stakeholders, including local
communities and indigenous ethnic minorities, civil society and non-governmental organisations, and for
its coordinating, monitoring, reviewing and reporting roles.

The MOE and line Ministries have a facilitating and implementing role. Strategically, MOE, as the
coordinator of the NBSAP, will develop and implement a communication and outreach strategy to raise

2 National Biodiversity Steering Committee has been invalidated by Subdecree N0 59
dated 18 May 2015 and merged into National Council for Sustainable Development

                                                  xxvi
awareness and preparedness about the NBSAP, and to promote wide participation and enhance the
participation of all groups of stakeholders, including by emphasizing the win-win situations in which such
participation would result.
The MOE will also provide the clearing-house mechanism, hosted in the Ministry, with additional
resources to enhance the mobilization and storage of relevant data from all sources, including data generated
under the Rio Conventions, biodiversity-related conventions, and sectors that use components of
biodiversity or impact biodiversity. Accessibility will be made as user-friendly as needed to encourage a
wide use of the clearing-house mechanism and to catalyze improved well-informed decision-making. As a
prerequisite, the clearing-house mechanism should be made sufficiently interactive and interoperable with other
databases in the country. It should be easily accessible to stakeholders outside of the environment sector to
input and manage their own data. The international community and international investors increasingly require
transparent and accurate information.
In order to achieve the targets and implement the NBSAP, many actions will have to be carried out at the
local level. The development of Local Biodiversity Strategies and Action Plans and more specific site
relevant targets will be encouraged and supported.
Group 3 themes in this NBSAP consist of strategies and actions that are meant to enhance and maintain
favorable conditions to enable the implementation of the NBSAP and the achievement of the targets.
Awareness-raising and resource mobilization were identified as priorities. Limited financial resources
were found to be one of the most critical obstacles to the implementation of the 2002 NBSAP. The
mobilization of financial resources is thus essential for operationalizing the updated NBSAP and
achieving the associated targets. A diversified source of financing is recommended including in
particular a strong engagement of the business sector. As a matter of urgency, Cambodia will develop, as
soon as the NBSAP is approved, its biodiversity portfolio for GEF6 building on its experience with
GEF5. Not only the ten GEF6 programmes will be considered, but also the biodiversity focal area set-
aside funds (FAS) for implementing enabling activities and GEF funds under the other focal areas.

                                                 xxvii
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

 I. INTRODUCTION

Cambodia is predominantly dependent on its rich biodiversity and other natural resources for its socio
economic development. However, various factors exert increasing pressures on these resources. These
factors include, as noted in the National Sustainable Development Strategy (2009): high population
growth and increasing economic demands; land degradation; habitat fragmentation from public works;
overexploitation of resources in particular in forests, freshwaters and marine and coastal areas; pollution
from unsustainable agriculture and industries; and natural disasters. Following the adoption of the
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) in 1992, the world community has increased efforts to reduce
the loss of genetic resources, species of fauna and flora, and natural ecosystems.

The Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) recognize that National Biodiversity
Strategies and Action Plans (NBSAPs) are the principal instruments for implementing the Convention at
the national level. Cambodia acceded to the Convention in September 1995 and adopted its NBSAP in
2002 in response to Article 6 of the Convention. The long term goal of the Strategy, as described in its
vision, is to achieve "equitable economic prosperity and improved quality of life through sustainable use,
protection and management of biological resources" by using, protecting and managing biodiversity for
sustainable development in Cambodia.

The 2002 Strategy provided Cambodia with a framework for action at all levels so as to enhance the
countrys ability to conserve biodiversity, use its biological resources sustainably, ensure the productivity,
diversity and integrity of its natural systems and, as a result, its ability to reduce poverty and improve the
quality of life of all Cambodians. The 2002 Strategy emphasized capacity building, community
involvement and intersectional cooperation. It also described how Cambodia could contribute to
international efforts to implement the Convention.

Twelve years after the adoption of its NBSAP, Cambodia has only partly implemented its strategic goals,
objectives and priority actions. With the adoption of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 and its
Aichi Biodiversity Targets by the world community in 2010 and in response to a request of the CBD
Conference of the Parties in decision X/21, Cambodia undertook the revision of its NBSAP to have an
updated version in place by 2015 at the latest. It is important to note that in 2012, the United Nations
reaffirmed the importance of biodiversity and ecosystem services for sustainable development and
recognized, through the Rio+20 Conference and the General Assembly, that the Strategic Plan for
Biodiversity 2011-2020 represents a universally agreed framework for action on biodiversity and a
foundation for sustainable development for all stakeholders.

The updating of the NBSAPs is referenced in several decisions of the CBD Conference of the Parties but
decisions IX/8 and X/2 are the main decisions providing guidance for NBSAP process, substance,
components, support systems, and monitoring and review systems. The main points to note are that:

         (a) The updated NBSAP should be in line with the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020
               and include not only the usual objectives for reducing the direct pressures on biodiversity
               and promoting sustainable use, improving the status of biodiversity by safeguarding
               ecosystems, species and genetic diversity, and regarding the ways and means for enhancing
               implementation, but also objectives and targets relating to (i) addressing underlying causes
               of biodiversity loss and (ii) enhancing the benefits to all from biodiversity and ecosystem
               services;

         (b) National targets should be integrated into the NBSAPs to be adopted as policy instruments
               and integrated into national development and poverty reduction policies and strategies;

         (c) The updated NBSAPs should take into account the ecosystem approach and the value of
               biodiversity components; identify priority actions at the national or regional level; identify
               national and regional targets and associated indicators; and include plans for resource
               mobilization at the national, regional and international levels.

The updated NBSAPs should also build on the achievements of the 2002 NBSAP, take into account the
constraints encountered during the implementation of the strategy and the various strategies and plans
(listed in Annex 1) relating to biodiversity and sustainable development adopted by Cambodia since 2002.
To ensure harmony, coherence, complementarity and synergy with all these approaches, strategies and
plans and that they align with the national development goals and priorities, the updated NBSAP drew on
the documents listed in Annex 1.

                                                                 1
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

           Box: Process used for updating the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan

The process for updating the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan included a national
consultation workshop, experts meetings, a public forum, and sub-national consultation meetings. A
Technical Working Group consisting of representatives of 9 ministries was established to work with the
International Conventions and Biodiversity Department (ICBD), a body of the General Department of
Administration for Nature Conservation (GDANCP) and Protection, within the MOE. There were more
than 15 technical working group meetings to review drafts and discuss the revisions of the NBSAP.

More specifically:

         (a) The national and subnational stakeholder consultations were held on 4 September 2012, 24
               March 2014 and 4 September 2014 to ensure that all biodiversity issues were included and
               all sectoral plans taken into consideration;

         (b) The Technical Working Groups meetings were organized as follows:
                (i) Held on 24 July, 6 August and 29-30 August 2012, the first three meetings of the
                       Technical Working Group considered the national biodiversity targets and related
                       indicators. These meetings identified five more themes for inclusion in the NBSAP;
               (ii) The fourth and fifth meetings held on 18 December 2013 and 2 January 2014
                       respectively reviewed and approved the Fifth National Report to the Convention on
                       Biological Diversity before sending it to CBD Secretariat;

              (iii) The sixth to the tenth meetings, organized on 14 January, 6 February, 3 March, 24
                       July and 15 August 2014, assessed the implementation of the 2002 NBSAP in light of
                       the national biodiversity status report, and considered the vision, mission, key issues,
                       strategic objectives, key and priority actions of the updated NBSAP;

               (iv) The eleventh to fifteenth formal and informal meetings had been organized
                       subsequently in late 2014 and beginning of 2015 to review and discuss the identified
                       key priority actions and ensure that they align with sectoral and national development
                       plans and strategies;

               (v) In addition to the formal technical working group meeting, there were a few
                       information meetings among multi-sectoral expert groups;

         (c) An expert meeting was held on 28 October 2014 to review the final technical draft NBSAP
               and NBSR, focusing on its content and formatting, as well as on the trends in genetic,
               species, and ecosystem diversities;

         (d) The Inception workshop was organized on 4 September 2012 to announce and call for the
               cooperation and involvement of all relevant stakeholders, including the indigenous and local
               community, academies, and the private sector in the implementation of this project, and to
               take into account their inputs for updating the NBSAP and NBSR;

         (e) The first consultation workshop was held on 24 March 2014, with the participation of
               government institutions, national and international organizations, and other stakeholders.
               The workshop discussed and endorsed the key elements of the NBSAP, including the
               national targets and biodiversity indicators. The second meeting was a national workshop
               held on 04 September 2014 for a thorough and in-depth discussion of the key elements of the
               updated NBSAP, including the national biodiversity status report; the NBSAP vision,
               mission, strategic objectives and priority actions; the national targets, the actions required for
               achieving the targets, indicators of progress towards the achievement of the targets, and the
               roles in and responsibilities for implementing the targets and the NBSAP; enabling
               conditions; as well as monitoring, evaluation and reporting.

The National Biodiversity Steering Committee (NBSC) has been established to provide guidance, to
provide an overview and to make decisions on the overall project implementation and adoption of the
revised NBSAP and NBSR. This committee is composed of 17 members, including the Minister of
Environment as chair, members from 14 relevant institutions and 3 representative governors from three
sub national regions: lowland, mountain, and marine areas. There were three National Biodiversity
Steering Committee meetings held on 1 November 2012, 7 July 2014, and 4 March 2015 to review
additional adoptions in the updating of the NBSAP and NBSR.

                                                                 2
                                                           National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                    Structure of NBSAP Updating Task Force

- Chair TWG, MOE                 - Technical Working Group             - Minister of the Environment, chair
- Project Director               - Concerned ministries/departments    - Secretary of State (MAFF), Deputy
- Project Assistants             - National and International          - Under Secretary of States from

- Sectoral Biodiversity Experts     Advisors                              12 institutions, members
   (MOE, MAFF, MOP, MRD,         - Academies, private sectors, ILC     - Governors of 3 provinces, members
   MOEF, MOEYS, MOWRAM,          - Civil societies and IOs/NGOs

   MOT, and MOME)

   Technical Work, Inputs &            Technical Direction &              Project Direction & Policy

           Collaboration                     Cooperation                          Development
- Collect relevant information   - Assist in development of            - Provide guidance and monitor
- Develop proposals for
                                    Biodiversity Strategy and Action      project implementation
   implementing of Strategy and     Plan                               - Review and endorse final draft
   Action Plan                   - Review draft proposals and reports
- Liaise and coordinate BPU      - Submit draft documents to NBSC         of NBSAP and NBSR
- Discuss ideas, proposals, and  - Organize meetings & workshops       - Submit final drafts to

   draft document with BPU       - Overall project administration         government

                    Inputs for Updating Cambodian NBSAP

Aichi Biodiversity               Cambodian Biodiversity
      Targets                              Targets

                                                                       NBSAP-2002

5th National                        NBSAP                                        NBSR
   Report                        UPDATING                                      Updating

     Sectoral                         2015                             MDG/NDP,
      Plans                                                                  ...
                                 National
                                  Policies

                                 3
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

II. OVERALL STRATEGY OF THE UPDATED NBSAP AND NATIONAL TARGETS

Vision

By 2050, Cambodias biodiversity and its ecosystem services are valued, conserved, restored where
necessary, wisely used and managed, so as to ensure equitable economic prosperity and improved quality
of life for all in the country.

Mission

To use, protect and manage biodiversity for sustainable development in Cambodia. To ensure this,
biodiversity issues and values are mainstreamed in national development and sectoral policies, plans and
programmes; biodiversity, our natural capital, is protected by reducing the various direct and indirect
pressures causing its loss or degradation, and is used wisely so as to enhance the benefits from it to the
people of Cambodia, particularly in rural areas; and the enabling environment for effective and efficient
implementation of this mission is strengthened.

Overall strategic objectives

In order to achieve the mission and vision of this Strategy, Cambodia adopted the following framework
strategic objectives:

         a. Identify, inventory, monitor and enhance awareness about genetic resources, species,
               habitats or ecosystems and related ecosystem services that are important for sustainable
               development and poverty eradication in Cambodia as a priority for conservation and
               sustainable use;

         b. Identify and describe the direct and indirect factors and processes that are negatively
               impacting Cambodias priority biodiversity components; and apply, as appropriate,
               preventive and corrective measures;

         c. Maintain or strengthen measures that have a positive impact on biodiversity and thus
               enhance the benefits to all in Cambodia from biodiversity and associated ecosystem services,
               for an equitable economic prosperity and improved quality of life;

         d. Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation of the strategy.

These strategic objectives will be considered under each of the themes (see below) identified as areas
where implementation activities will be focused. They are in line with the four values that the Royal
Government of Cambodia (RGC) retained to guide actions identified in many development strategies,
such as the Strategic Planning Framework 2010-2019 for Fisheries2: Understanding (assessment of status
and trend of, and threats to, biodiversity and associated ecosystem services), Protecting, Growing
(addressing causes of biodiversity loss, and enhancement of benefits) and Supporting (enhancement of the
enabling conditions).

Rationales and key generic actions under the overall strategic objectives

Strategic objective A: Identify, inventory, monitor and enhance awareness about genetic resources,
species, habitats or ecosystems and related ecosystem services that are important for sustainable
development and poverty eradication in Cambodia, as a priority for conservation and sustainable use.

Rationale

Cambodia is blessed with an abundance of natural riches3, with new species being discovered frequently4.
The majority of the population relies directly on these natural resources for their food, livelihoods and
well-being. As such, Cambodia has taken a number of conservation measures to safeguard this natural
capital that is otherwise subject to various pressures, including habitat damage/loss (which is considered
as the most direct and critical threat to biodiversity in Cambodia), climate change, pollution,
unsustainable use of natural resources. However, the implementation of these conservation measures has
proven to be a real challenge.

Due to limited resources, Cambodia has needed to adopt a step-by-step approach focusing first on the
components of biodiversity that are important for sustainable development and poverty reduction, and
then on those that are currently in danger of disappearance or degradation, or could be subject to high
risks in the near future. Priority components of biodiversity must therefore be identified. Criteria for

                                                                 4
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

identifying important components of biodiversity can be based on Annex I to the Convention on
Biological Diversity and on criteria for ecologically and biologically significant areas adopted by the
CBD Conference of the Parties in 2010. Their importance, including their biological/ecological, cultural,
spiritual and socioeconomic values, must be described and their status monitored regularly.

Table 1 in the 2002 NBSAP, which presents examples of services and goods provided by ecosystems in
Cambodia, can be used as a starting point for listing the value of ecosystems found in Cambodia. To the
list it is necessary to add dryland, savannahs, marine and urban ecosystems and possibly mountains and
islands. These ecosystems need to be mapped and their value assessed using e.g. TEEB guidelines. It is
also useful to refer to UNEP/CBD/COP/12/4 (from page 31).

As noted in the Fifth National Report, the concept of ecosystem services and other biodiversity values is
not fully understood in Cambodia. That being said, people are gradually becoming aware of the
consequences of not managing the environment sustainably. Awareness about these components and their
value needs to be raised among the people and decision-makers. This knowledge needs to be included in
education curricula, it needs to be disseminated in the media and taken into consideration in the
governments discussions on laws, budgets, programmes and strategies, and it needs to be integrated into
the wider development programmes and strategies, and in all the sectors.

Adequate monitoring followed by regular reporting and a wide dissemination of information on the status
and trends of priority biodiversity components will allow decision-makers at all levels to adopt and
implement adaptive management programmes, and the government to develop adequate policy responses.
People are more disposed to protect the things that they know, and even more so when they know the
importance of what it is they are to protect. Regular reporting will also contribute to enhancing public
awareness and participation.

Table 1: Key actions and roles of the Ministries for Strategic Objective A

                                         Key action                              Responsible Ministries and
                                                                                other participating Ministries
1.1. Assess the functioning, role, value/importance for sustainable
development and poverty eradication, status and trends of biodiversity and its  MOE, MAFF and GSSD
components in Cambodia.
                                                                                MLMUPC, MOT, MRD, MEF,
Information on the status and trends of, and threats to, biodiversity and the   MOEYS, MME, MOC, MOH,
related ecosystem services combined with information on the contribution of     MOP, MOWRAM, MOWA,
biodiversity components to sustainable development and poverty eradication      NCDM and TSA
will inform about those components of biodiversity that require priority
attention for protection, sustainable use measures and funding.

This study requires indicators and can provide the baseline data needed as
reference when evaluating progress and should also include an assessment of
the consequences of ecosystem degradation and biodiversity loss in general,
e.g. loss of ecosystem resilience.

As a prerequisite, it is necessary to define methodologies, build human
capacity and mobilize the financial resources needed.

1.2. Establish a list of the priority components of biodiversity and ecosystem  MOE, MAFF and GSSD
services including their ecological/environmental and socioeconomic values; in
other words their provisioning, regulation, cultural or spiritual, and / or     [
supporting values.
                                                                                MLMUPC, MOT, MRD, MEF,
                                                                                MOEYS, MME, MOC, MOH,
                                                                                MOP, MOWRAM, MOWA,
                                                                                NCDM and TSA

1.3. Monitor and report regularly on the status of these                        MOE and GSSD
environmentally/ecologically, socially (including health) and economically
important components of biodiversity.                                           MAFF, MLMUPC, MOT,
                                                                                MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MME,
                                                                                MOP, NCDM and TSA

5
   National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

1.4. Organize data and information collected, including the associated               MOE and GSSD
scientific, traditional knowledge and information from other sources, in user-
friendly and widely accessible databases for dissemination and use in                MAFF, MLMUPC, MOT,
awareness-raising, as well as education programmes and for decision-making.          MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MME,
                                                                                     MOC, MOH, MOP,
                                                                                     MOWRAM, MOWA, NCDM
                                                                                     and TSA

1.5. Raise awareness about the priority components of biodiversity,                  MOE/GSSD, MAFF and
including their associated ecosystem services and their values, and promote          MOEYS
engagement of the different sectors, through various types of publications,
education programmes and the media.                                                  MOT, MRD, MEF , MCFA,
                                                                                     MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC,
As noted in decision X/32.2 g of the CBD Conference of the Parties, the              MME, MOC, MOH, MOI,
sectors should include inter alia, energy, the financial sector, forestry, wildlife  MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM,
management, fisheries, water supply, agriculture, disaster prevention, health,       MPWT, MOWA, NCDM, NFP
and climate change.                                                                  and TSA

Implementation of this strategic objective and the identified actions will contribute to (i) the
implementation of Aichi Biodiversity Target 18 and Cambodia Biodiversity Target 17, both on traditional
knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous and local communities; and Aichi Biodiversity
Target 19 on knowledge, the science base and technologies relating to biodiversity, as well as Cambodia
Biodiversity Target 19 on an information system containing data and information on biodiversity, and (ii)
the achievement of the other Aichi biodiversity targets and other Cambodia biodiversity targets.

Strategic objective B: Identify and describe the direct and indirect factors and processes that are
negatively impacting Cambodia's priority biodiversity components; and apply, as appropriate,

preventive and corrective measures.

Rationale

Since the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, there has been a lot of progress in terms of the conservation of
biodiversity in Cambodia. However, there are still a lot of constraints in the implementation of the
strategy, also the intensity of the pressures on biodiversity is high even and increasing in some cases.

As noted in the 3rd edition of the Global Biodiversity Outlook, one of the main reasons for the failure to
slow biodiversity loss between 2002 and 2010 is that measures taken tended to focus only on the state of
biodiversity, such as protected areas and programmes targeted at particular species, or on addressing the
direct pressures of biodiversity loss. These direct pressures consist of land-use change, habitat
fragmentation, land degradation and degradation of habitats used by migratory species; climate change;
introduction and spread of invasive alien species; unsustainable exploitation of natural resources,
including illegal trade in endangered species of wild fauna and flora, overexploitation, overharvesting,
and overgrazing; pollution with wastes, pesticides and fertilizers; and natural disasters. As noted in the
National Sustainable Development Strategy (2009), biodiversity loss and other environmental problems
hinder Cambodias progress toward sustainable development:

         (a) Land-use, which is already a complicated issue, difficult to manage and control in some
               provinces and cities, is compounded by issues of land tenure;

         (b) Degradation of forests and the loss of biodiversity due to illegal logging, land clearing and
               hunting of rare/endangered species are causing, not only environmental problems, but also
               creating adverse impacts on the socioeconomic development, especially in local
               communities;

         (c) A large number of Cambodians, especially in rural and remote areas are experiencing
               scarcity of water for domestic uses and irrigation; and

         (d) Economic sectors like mining, industry, energy, water supply and tourism development are
               facing many environmental problems requiring urgent and effective solutions in order to
               ensure long-term sustainable development.

The 3rd edition of the Global Biodiversity Outlook also indicated that underlying causes of biodiversity
had not been addressed in a meaningful manner. It was thus strongly recommended to use every

6
National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

opportunity to prevent underlying pressures from inevitably leading to pressures that impact biodiversity
directly. A literature survey indicates that indirect causes of biodiversity loss include:

         (e) Causes from socioeconomic and cultural environment, such as poverty often linked to
               demographic growth and unsustainable consumption, production, economic demand,
               markets and trade; lack of awareness and knowledge including ignorance of impact of new
               technologies; inadequate gender considerations, and non-valorization of traditional
               knowledge;

         (f) Weaknesses in policy and legal response consisting essentially of limited political will,
               despite the fact that the Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC) outlined four main
               objectives in the Rectangular Strategy Phase II, of which the fourth is to ensure
               environmental sustainability through sustainable management of natural resources,
               inadequate national compliance with multilateral environmental agreements, inadequate
               sector integration or weak appropriation/ownership of the NBSAP by major stakeholders,
               inadequate and obsolete legislation, and weak enforcement; and

         (g) Weakness in institutional response, generally resulting from lack of or poor planning, weak
               co-ordination structures, insufficient participation, and inadequate funding of biodiversity.

Improving knowledge on the value of biodiversity, and the causes and consequences of biodiversity loss
as well as a change of behavior by all stakeholders in favor of biodiversity conservation are fundamental
to addressing indirect causes of biodiversity loss.

Strategic objective B recognizes that the most appropriate measures to avert loss or degradation of
biodiversity can be taken when adequate information on pressures and their impacts is available.

Table 2: Key actions and roles of the Ministries for Strategic Objective B

                                    Key action                               Responsible Ministries and other
                                                                                   participating Ministries
2.1 Investigate the direct pressures causing the loss or degradation
of biodiversity and related ecosystem services, and regularly monitor      MOE, MAFF and GSSD
their impacts                                                              MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MME,
                                                                           MOWRAM, MLMUPC and TSA

2.2 Keeping in mind the ecosystem approach and requirements for            MOE, MAFF and GSSD
sustainable development, put in place or strengthen measures that will
control, or whenever possible, stop the direct pressures and reduce their  MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MAFF,
impact on biodiversity, particularly in natural habitats and vulnerable    MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC,
ecosystems                                                                 MME, MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF,
                                                                           MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA,
                                                                           NCDM, NFP, TSA and NCDM

2.3 Carry out research showing and assessing the cause-effect              MOE, MAFF and GSSD
relationship between underlying factors and biodiversity loss and
degradation, and use the results to develop and implement plans and        MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MAFF,
programmes that will reduce the negative impact of underlying factors      MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC,
on Cambodias natural capital                                               MME, MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF,
                                                                           MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA,
                                                                           NCDM, NFP and TSA

2.4 Regularly assess and improve, as needed, the effectiveness of          MOE, MAFF and GSSD
measures taken to address direct and indirect causes of the loss and
degradation of biodiversity and associated ecosystem services, bearing     MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MCFA,
in mind the principles of adaptive management                              MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME,
                                                                           MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP,
                                                                           MOWRAM, MPWT, MCFA, MOWA,
                                                                           NCDM and TSA

2.5 Promote a planning process that is participatory, ensuring in          MOE, MAFF and GSSD
particular the involvement of local communities and indigenous ethnic
minorities, that uses biodiversity-inclusive strategic environmental       MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MCFA,
                                                                           MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME,
                                                               7
   National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

assessments and environmental impact assessments, and that takes into     MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP,
account the ecosystem approach as well as the guidelines for the          MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA, NCDM
sustainable use of biodiversity and similar guidelines, particularly for  and TSA
agriculture, aquaculture, fisheries, forestry, landscape management,
public works and industrial development

2.6 Bearing in mind the current coverage of the protected area            MOE, MAFF and GSSD
system in Cambodia, complete the ecological representativeness of the
system by creating protected areas in forests, fresh waters and marine    MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MCFA,
and coastal areas, and focus on ensuring effective and equitable          MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME,
management of all protected areas and conservation areas,                 MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP,
connectivity, and integration of the protected area system into the       MOWRAM, MPWT, MCFA, MOWA,
wider landscape and seascape                                              NCDM and TSA

2.7 Restore or rehabilitate degraded ecosystems and recover               MOE, MAFF and GSSD

[[                                                                        MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MCFA,
                                                                          MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME,
threatened species and genetic resources, for the benefit of all in       MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP,
Cambodia, in particular members of the local communities and              MOWRAM, MPWT, MCFA, MOWA,
indigenous ethnic minorities who rely directly on local biodiversity and  NCDM and TSA
ecosystem services for their livelihoods and well-being

2.8 Integrate biodiversity and its ecosystem services into wider          MOE, MAFF, MOT, MRD, MOI,
national and subnational development strategies and plans                 and GSSD

                                                                          MOEYS, MCFA, MCRA, MIH,
                                                                          MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH,
                                                                          MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT,
                                                                          MOWA, NCDM and TSA

2.9 Enhance awareness about direct and indirect causes of                 MOE, MAFF, MOEYS and GSSD
biodiversity loss and degradation, their environmental and
socioeconomic consequences, and measures taken or to be taken by          MOT, MRD, MEF, MCFA, MCRA,
decision-makers at all levels, in the government, local communities and   MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH,
indigenous ethnic minorities, the private sector, and all the economic    MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM,
sectors relying on or impacting the natural capital                       MPWT, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

2.10 Put in place and promote the use of incentive measures               MOE, MAFF and GSSD
favorable to the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, and
effective law enforcement mechanisms                                      MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MCFA,
                                                                          MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME,
                                                                          MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP,
                                                                          MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA, NCDM
                                                                          and TSA

2.11 Mobilize human and financial resources needed for the                MOE, MEF, MAFF and GSSD
implementation of these actions and empower the relevant institutions
                                                                          MOT, MRD, MOEYS, MCFA,
                                                                          MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME,
                                                                          MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP,
                                                                          MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA, NCDM
                                                                          and TSA

Key actions 2.6 (on Cambodia protected area system taking into account the urgent need to protect and
recover threatened species) and 2.7 (on restoration of degraded ecosystems and recovery of threatened
species) are in line with the key potential actions identified in the 4th edition of the Global Biodiversity
Outlook that could accelerate progress towards the achievements of the strategic goals of the Aichi
Biodiversity Targets, if more widely applied. With regard to ecosystem restoration, it is important to
recall a conclusion from the Economics of Ecosystem and Biodiversity (TEEB) Initiative that investments
in maintenance and conservation are almost always cheaper than trying to restore damaged ecosystems.
Nevertheless, the social benefits that flow from restoration of ecosystems providing essential services (for

8
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

example wetlands, coral reefs, rivers, forests and mountain areas, and "water towers") can be several
times higher than the costs.
Implementation of this Strategic Objective B directly covers the implementation of Aichi Biodiversity
Targets 1 to 15 and contributes to the implementation of Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) 13, 14
and 15.
Strategic objective C: Maintain or strengthen measures that have a positive impact on biodiversity and
thus enhance the benefits to all in Cambodia from biodiversity and associated ecosystem services for
an equitable economic prosperity and improved quality of life.
Rationale
Under strategic objective A, components of biodiversity important for sustainable development and
poverty reduction in Cambodia will be described and their value assessed. Under this strategic objective
C, measures put forward under the strategic objective B above are promoted so as to strengthen and
enhance the benefits from these measures in a sustainable way. The focus will be on the supply of
essential services, including services related to water, health, food security, climate change adaptation,
resistance and resilience to land degradation or natural disasters and, in general, services related to
livelihoods and the well-being of all in Cambodia. The specific needs of women, local communities and
indigenous ethnic minorities, elderly persons, children, and the poor and vulnerable will be taken into
account.
The realization of the benefits from measures taken will act as incentives for biodiversity conservation
and sustainable use. It is expected that public engagement combined with appropriate pricing, fiscal
policies such as a green tax, adjustment of national rules and frameworks for markets and economic
activities and other mechanisms to reflect the real value of biodiversity could facilitate the creation of
powerful incentives (including the removal of perverse subsidies) that would not only reverse patterns of
destruction resulting from biodiversity under-valuation, but that would also strengthen the short and long-
term gains one can derive from conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity.
The short, medium and long-term interventions put forward in the National Green Growth Roadmap
adopted by Cambodia in 2009 provide an overall guidance for enhancing benefits from biodiversity in the
country. As embodied in the Roadmaps goal, the Green Growth initiatives "foster sustainability of
economic growth by enhancing sustainable consumption and production, by greening markets and
businesses, by creating favorable climate for the establishment of sustainable infrastructure that, in turn,
can enable the population to enjoy increased access to crucial goods and services and to ensure equal
access to resources for both women and men".
Implementation of the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable
Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization, as well as the utilization of associated traditional
knowledge and implementation of related legislations, when in place, will provide guarantees for
improving the livelihoods of local people as knowledge-holders and contribute to the cost of conserving
biodiversity. Cambodia signed the Protocol on 1 February 2012 and became Party on 19 April 2015. The
Protocol entered into force in October 2014.

                                                                 9
                National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Table 3: Key actions and roles of the Ministries for Strategic objective C

Key action                                                             Responsible Ministries and other
                                                                            participating Ministries

3.1 Assess the level of functioning of ecosystems associated           MOE, MAFF, MOT and GSSD
with essential services, including services related to water, health,
food security, climate change adaptation, resistance and resilience    MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MCFA, MCRA,
to climate change, land degradation or natural disasters and, in       MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH,
general, services related to livelihoods and the well-being of all in  MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM,
Cambodia                                                               MPWT, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

3.2 Improve or maintain at favourable levels the status and            MOE, MAFF, MOT and GSSD
functioning of biologically, ecologically and socioeconomically
important ecosystems, species and genetic diversity by developing      [
and implementing appropriate management plans and positive
incentives                                                             MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MCFA, MCRA,
                                                                       MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH,
                                                                       MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM,
                                                                       MPWT, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

3.3 Develop and implement a biodiversity economic valuation5           MOE, MAFF and GSSD
and accounting programme to generate information that will allow
the integration of biodiversity into national accounting and trading   MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MME,
of biodiversity components, and thus realize the contribution of       MOC, MOH, MLMUPC, MOI, MOP,
biodiversity to the national budget                                    MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA and TSA

3.4 Mainstream biodiversity into key development sectors,              MOE, MAFF, MOEYS and GSSD
including into relevant national and local policies and programmes,
public and private sector decision-making, development planning,       MOT, MRD, MEF, MCFA, MCRA, MIH,
land-use planning, sustainable use and management of natural           MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH, MOI,
resources and poverty alleviation plans, climate resilience plans,     MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT,
and formal and informal education system                               MOWA, NCDM and TSA

3.5 Raise awareness, understanding and ownership of all                MOE, MAFF, MOEYS and GSSD
stakeholders, in particular in the private sector and among members
of the local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities,             MOT, MRD, MEF, MME, MOC, MOH,
regarding the value of biodiversity and the contribution of its        MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MOWA and
conservation and sustainable use to livelihoods and well-being,        TSA
building on mechanisms existing in the country

3.6 Develop and implement, in harmony with international and           MOE, MAFF, MEF and GSSD
regional agreements to which Cambodia is party, an incentive
system of subsidies, taxes and regulations that encourages the         MOT, MRD, MOEYS, MME, MOC,
conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity and                   MLMUPC, MOH, MOI, MOP,
environmentally responsible behaviour, and eliminates, phases out      MOWRAM, MOWA, MCFA, NCDM,
or reforms harmful subsidies on, for instance, fossil fuels and        TSA
agriculture

3.7 Develop and implement a scheme for innovative resource             MOE, MAFF, MEF and GSSD
mobilization, including in particular and in line with the Green
Growth Roadmap: (i) payment for ecosystem services to pay for          MOT, MRD, MOEYS, MCFA, MCRA,
biodiversity activities; (ii) green tax and budget reform; and (iii)   MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH,
swap of debts schemes with international investors                     MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM,
                                                                       MPWT, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

This Strategic Objective C is in line with Aichi Biodiversity Strategic Goal D on enhancing the benefits to
all from biodiversity and ecosystem services.

            10
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Strategic objective D: Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation of the strategy

Rationale

Implementation of the NBSAP objectives depends on various needs that have to be fulfilled to pave the
way for the actions that will directly result in the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity and lead
to the ultimate goal of ensuring equitable economic prosperity and improved quality of life for all in
Cambodia. These needs are usually associated with the indirect drivers of change in biodiversity; namely,
the human population, economic activity, technology and socio-political and cultural factors.

In 2013, Cambodia's population was estimated to be 15.2 million, with an annual growth rate of 1.7% and
a density of 82.74 persons per square kilometer in 2011. As stated in the Fifth National Report under the
Convention on Biological Diversity, Cambodia was ranked 138 of 187 countries in the UNDPs Human
Development Index in 2013. However, the countrys poverty rate declined to 20% in 2012 with a GDP
per capita that increased from USD $760 in 2008 to almost USD $1,000 in 2012, making Cambodia the
15th fastest growing economy in the world in the past ten years, 5th among developing countries achieving
the Millennium Development Goals, and 1st in improving social indicators in the Asia Pacific region. In
any case, the rapid population growth is one factor that is viewed as a possible obstacle to green growth.
The unsustainable use of natural resources increases with demographic growth and increased demand for
biodiversity resources used in production. Migration and urbanization associated to the high demographic
trend also exacerbate the pressures on ecosystems. Population increase is among the drivers of pressure
on biodiversity, and is something that cannot be reversed rapidly. It requires long-term strategies and
policies from the government aiming at bringing consumption of biological resources and the use of
various ecosystem goods and services within safe ecological limits. Awareness-raising and capacity-
building are ways used to help populations achieve some sustainability in their use of natural resources;
they become more conscious of the value of biodiversity, of associated traditional knowledge, and of the
impacts of anthropogenic activities.

Over the last decades, Cambodia has experienced rapid economic growth resulting in significant poverty
reduction. Despite the global downturn, the Cambodian economy remains in good shape, driven by
continuous and increasing investments in the garment industry, agriculture, construction and tourism. The
economy is underpinned by political stability, active private sector participation, reform efforts, increased
official development aid and sustained foreign direct investment. Exploitable oil deposits were recently
found underneath Cambodia's territorial waters, representing a potential revenue stream for the
government, if commercial extraction becomes feasible. Opportunities for mining bauxite, gold, iron and
gems are also attracting investors. However, economic growth in Cambodia is happening largely at the
expense of the environment, with extensive overexploitation of Cambodia's fisheries and forests that are
now disappearing at a rapid rate owing to the compound negative impacts on water retention and soils,
and resulting in the loss of habitats for many species of animals and plants, as well as in CO2 emissions.
In addition, the poverty level in Cambodia is still high and posing, with demographic imbalance, a
daunting challenge to long-term economic development. The major economic challenge for Cambodia
over the next decade will be fashioning an economic environment that will have a significantly reduced
impact on biodiversity and in which the private sector can create enough jobs to handle Cambodia's
demographic imbalance.

In the past decades, the Government of Cambodia has developed policies, strategies, plans and
programmes that provide a supportive enabling environment for the conservation and sustainable use of
biodiversity (see Annex 1) both at the national level and, essentially through the Agreement on the
Cooperation for the Sustainable Development of the Mekong River Basin, at the regional level. Through
this updated NBSAP, Cambodia intends to further mainstream biodiversity considerations in the
implementation on the ground of all these relevant policies, strategies, plans and programmes and more
specifically by integrating biodiversity into key economic development sectors, into development
planning, policy and legal reforms, strategic environmental assessment (SEA), environmental impact
assessment (EIA), land-use planning, sustainable use and management of natural resources, poverty
alleviation plans, climate resilience plans, education systems and economic mechanisms such as public-
private partnerships, market-based certification, voluntary best practices, economic valuation, payment
for ecosystem services, and biodiversity offsets. Mainstreaming makes sense, as biodiversity touches
upon almost all economic sectors, and, as such, conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity cannot be
achieved only through environmental policies.

                                                                11
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Table 4: Key actions for strengthening the enabling environment and roles of the Ministries under
           Strategic Objectives D

Key action                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Responsible Ministries and other
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              participating Ministries

            Human capacities

4.1 Building on previous and ongoing capacity needs assessments,                                                                                                                                                                                         MOE, MOEYS, MEF, MAFF
identify the human capacities needed for the implementation of the                                                                                                                                                                                       and GSSD
NBSAP; assess the existing capacities; develop and implement plans, using
a participatory approach, to fill the capacity gaps by supporting both formal                                                                                                                                                                            MOT, MRD, MCFA, MCRA,
and informal education programmes tailored for different levels of the                                                                                                                                                                                   MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC,
society and relevant sectors, by making use of regional cooperation, South-                                                                                                                                                                              MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP,
South and North-South cooperation, and by mobilizing the required                                                                                                                                                                                        MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA,
financial resources (See theme 20 for more details).                                                                                                                                                                                                     MCFA, NCDM and TSA

4.2 Encourage and support, including through the provision of guidance                                                                                                                                                                                   MOE, MAFF and GSSD
and resources, provincial and local authorities so that they can develop and
implement local biodiversity strategies and related action plans.                                                                                                                                                                                        MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MME, MOC, MOH, MOI,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MPWT, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [[

Institutional and legislative capacities

4.3 Building on previous and ongoing capacity needs assessments,                                                                                                                                                                                         MOE and GSSD
identify institutions that need to be strengthened and review relevant
national legislation and policies relating to biodiversity and its associated                                                                                                                                                                            MAFF, MOT, MRD, MEF,
ecosystem services; develop and implement plans to strengthen existing                                                                                                                                                                                   MOEYS, MCFA, MCRA, MIH,
institutions, including inter-agency bodies; enforce relevant laws inter alia                                                                                                                                                                            MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH,
through training programmes for the relevant authorities and enforce the                                                                                                                                                                                 MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM,
provision of the equipment/resources needed; promote incentives that will                                                                                                                                                                                MPWT, MOWA, NCDM and TSA
support implementation of the NBSAP, and mobilize the required financial
resources (See themes 15 and 21 for more details).

            Technological capacities

4.4 Building on previous and ongoing capacity needs assessments,                                                                                                                                                                                         MOE, MOEYS, MAFF and
identify technologies needed for the conservation and sustainable use of                                                                                                                                                                                 GSSD
biodiversity and associated ecosystem services; bearing in mind the gaps in
technology, develop and implement plans to acquire and/or adapt and                                                                                                                                                                                      MOT, MRD, MEF, MCFA,
validate the needed technologies in line with national and international                                                                                                                                                                                 MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME,
legislation or as part of the Nagoya Protocol, and mobilize the required                                                                                                                                                                                 MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP,
financial resources (See theme 17 for more details)                                                                                                                                                                                                      MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NCDM and TSA

            Financial sustainability

4.5 Bearing in mind that lack of financial resources was a major                                                                                                                                                                                         MOE, MAFF, MEF and GSSD
obstacle to the implementation of the 2002 NBSAP, assess the financial
needs for implementing the updated NBSAP; and develop and implement a                                                                                                                                                                                    MOT, MRD, MOEYS, MCFA,
strategy for enhancing the effectiveness in using existing financial                                                                                                                                                                                     MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME,
resources and for resource mobilization from diverse sources, including                                                                                                                                                                                  MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP,
national and international sources, taking into account the existing range of                                                                                                                                                                            MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA,
conventional and innovative funding instruments, so as to ensure financial                                                                                                                                                                               NCDM, NFP and TSA
sustainability (See theme 18 for more details).

4.6 Ensure, through participatory planning and enhanced coordination, MOE and GSSD
synergies among biodiversity projects and programmes under different

                                                               12
    National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Ministries, and establish strategic partnerships with the finance and             MAFF, MOT, MRD, MEF,
business sectors.                                                                 MOEYS, MCFA, MCRA, MIH,
                                                                                  MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH,
                                                                                  MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM,
                                                                                  MPWT, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

Participation and diversification of governance

4.7 Bearing in mind that biodiversity and its ecosystem services                  MOE, MAFF, MOT and GSSD
constitutes our natural capital and is the basis of life on Earth, also that its
management, conservation and sustainable use involves everybody,                  MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MLMUPC,
encourage the participation of all stakeholders, including local                  MME, MOC, MOH, MOP,
communities, indigenous ethnic minorities and the private sector, in the          MOWRAM, MOWA, TSA
planning, deciding on measures to be taken for the conservation and
sustainable use of biodiversity, and implementing them.

4.8 In line with the ecosystem approach and the Rectangular Strategy,             MOE MAFF, MOI and GSSD
ensure that management is decentralized to the lowest appropriate level for
greater efficiency, effectiveness and equity (See theme 19 for more details).     MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS,
                                                                                  MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC,
                                                                                  MME, MOC, MOH, , MOINF,
                                                                                  MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT,
                                                                                  MOWA, NCDM and TSA

Coordination and cooperation among stakeholders at the sub-national, national, regional and global levels

4.9 Bearing in mind that implementation of the NBSAP is a                         MOE, MAFF and GSSD
collaborative effort calling on all stakeholders, enhance a synergistic and
coherent implementation of and reporting on biodiversity-related                  MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS,
programmes initiated under different national strategies and plans, and           MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC,
regional and international agreements, making efficient use of the clearing-      MME, MOC, MOH, MOI,
house mechanism for technical and scientific cooperation, and avoiding a          MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM,
piecemeal approach to the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity        MCFA, MPWT, MOWA, NCDM
(See theme 23 for more details).                                                  and TSA

Education, public awareness and research development and coordination

4.10 Further integrate biodiversity, in particular its valuation and ways         MOE, MAFF, MOEYS and
and means to conserve it and use it sustainably, in the national education        GSSD
and research system, as well as in public awareness programmes, and
promote environmental awareness and formal and non-formal                         MOT, MRD, MEF, , MCFA,
environmental education curriculums and programmes, while improving               MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME,
the knowledge base at the national and local level.                               MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP,
                                                                                  MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA,
                                                                                  NCDM and TSA

4.11 Enhance coordination and synergies for efficient use of resources in         MOE, MAFF and GSSD
implementing education, public awareness and research programmes
dealing with biodiversity (See theme 20 for more details).                        MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS,
                                                                                  MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC,
                                                                                  MME, MOC, MOH, MOI,
                                                                                  MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM,
                                                                                  MPWT, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

4.12 Establish and strengthen key research institutions, such as                  MOE and GSSD
biodiversity centers, ecotourism centers, biodiversity training and
livelihood centers, botanical gardens, gene banks, refuge centers,                MAFF, MOT, MRD, MEF,
information centers.                                                              MOEYS, MAFF, MCFA, MCRA,
                                                                                  MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC,
                                                                                  MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP,
                                                                                  MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA,
                                                                                  NCDM, NFP and TSA

13
    National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

4.13 Enhance mechanisms for the management, dissemination, targeted          MOE, MAFF and GSSD
communication and exchange of scientific data and knowledge, including
traditional knowledge, about biodiversity and related ecosystem services,    MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS,
making effective use of the clearing-house mechanism (See theme 24 for       MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC,
additional details).                                                         MME, MOC, MOH, MOI,
                                                                             MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM,
                                                                             MPWT, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

Socioeconomic development, quality of life and poverty reduction

4.14 Foster studies that enhance the contribution of biodiversity            MOE, MAFF and GSSD
conservation and sustainable use to socioeconomic development, poverty
reduction and improved quality of life; and disseminate the results widely,  MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS,
particularly to decision and policy-makers.                                  MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC,
                                                                             MME, MOC, MOH, MOI,
                                                                             MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM,
                                                                             MPWT, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

This Strategic Objective D encompasses Aichi Biodiversity Targets 16 to 20 and sustains the
development goals adopted by the Royal Government of Cambodia in the Rectangular Strategy for
Growth, Employment, Equity and Efficiency in Cambodia. Implementation of this Strategic Objective
also supports the Sustainable Development Goal 17 (Strengthen the means of implementation and
revitalize the global partnership for sustainable development).

The above overall strategic objectives will be implemented under each of the 24 themes identified by the
Technical Working Group (TWG) as areas of focus for the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action
Plan (NBSAP), areas in which Cambodia has been mainstreaming biodiversity. Implementation of these
strategic objectives is expected to meet most of the environmental quality objectives proposed in the
National Sustainable Development Strategy (2009), i.e. productive land resources, rich forest resources,
high quality ground and surface water resources, rich fish resources, functional wetlands, sustainable
marine and coastal environment, rich biodiversity, limited influence on the climate, efficient use of
natural resources and limited waste generation and limited impact from natural disasters, and clean air.
They will also be used as a check list whenever a new ecosystem (e.g. urban ecosystem) or a specific
landscape/seascape (the socio-ecological production landscapes and seascapes under the Satoyama
Initiative) is found important for integration in the NBSAP.

14
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Principles governing the strategy

Effective implementation of the NBSAP will be guided by principles and approaches underpinning the
way Cambodia is promoting sustainable development, so as to reach the strategic objectives and achieve
the vision of this NBSAP. These principles are basically the same as the ones listed in the 2002 NBSAP.
They were revised in light of the Rectangular Strategy 2009-2013 and its decentralization and de-
concentration policy, the National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) (2006-2010), the National Green
Growth Roadmap 2013-2030, and other strategies listed in Annex 1 of this NBSAP. The principles are:

         1. Our natural capital consisting of biodiversity, its ecosystem services and other natural
               resources underpins our countrys economy, society, cultures and individual well-being. The
               values of the benefits we can derive from biodiversity are, however, often overlooked or
               poorly understood. They are yet to be fully taken into account in day-to-day decisions by all
               citizens and through economic signals in markets, and to be reflected adequately in the
               accounts of our society.

         2. Awareness of the value of biodiversity, its status and trend, the threats posed to its
               maintenance and proper functioning is a prerequisite for achieving conservation and
               sustainability in the use of natural resources.

         3. All the people of Cambodia depend on biodiversity and thus have a responsibility to ensure
               that biodiversity is conserved and used in a sustainable manner for the well-being of both
               present and future generations.

         4. The ecosystem approach is the primary framework for any decision and activity dealing with
               biodiversity and its associated ecosystem services. This approach consists of managing land,
               water and living resources in ways that promote conservation and sustainable use of
               biodiversity components and the sharing of benefits from the utilization of genetic resources.
               The approach is consistent with the spiritual and cultural values, as well as customary
               practices of local communities, the indigenous ethnic minorities and their traditional
               knowledge, innovations and practices.

         5. In accordance with the Rectangular Strategy and Principle 2 of the ecosystem approach, the
               management of biodiversity should be decentralized to the lowest appropriate level for
               greater efficiency, effectiveness and equity. Therefore, provincial and local authorities
               should be involved, wherever possible, in the planning and managing of biodiversity.

         6. Bearing in mind the potential gains from the management of biodiversity, there is usually a
               need to understand and manage ecosystems in an economic context (Ecosystem approach
               Principle 4) and thus to:

         7. Reduce those market distortions that adversely affect biodiversity;
         8. Align incentives to promote biodiversity conservation and sustainable use;
         9. Internalize costs and benefits in the given ecosystem to the extent feasible.
         10. Most problems of biodiversity management are complex and should involve all relevant

               sectors of society. They require the participation of all the stakeholders,6 including local
               communities and indigenous ethnic minorities; cooperation among different ministerial
               departments and line ministries; between public and private organizations; governmental,
               non-governmental and intergovernmental organizations, as appropriate.
         11. The conservation of biodiversity and the sustainable use of its components require local,
               national (including within and between ministries, between the public and private sectors)
               and global co-operation and the sharing of knowledge, costs and benefits.
         12. In order to succeed in slowing down biodiversity loss, indirect drivers must be tackled,
               where possible, together with direct pressures, so as to break the link between the indirect
               and direct drivers of biodiversity loss and thus prevent underlying pressures from inevitably
               leading to pressures impacting biodiversity directly.
         13. For a sustainable life, in harmony with nature and other people, one should not take more
               from nature than nature's ability to regenerate those products, and the use of natural
               resources must be shared among people in a reasonable and equitable way. The extraction of
               natural resources must be done in a nondestructive manner and by transparent means, in
               order to care for the future of our motherland.
         14. Long term development depends on the ecosystems capacity to deliver goods and services.
         15. Systems with a diversity of components are generally more resilient to perturbations or
               disturbances than systems with few components.

                                                                15
                                                                   National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

16. Development decisions must reflect ecological, economic, social, cultural and spiritual
     values of local populations.

17. Healthy, evolving ecosystems and the maintenance of natural processes are prerequisites for
     the in situ conservation of biodiversity and the sustainable use of biological resources.

18. Ex situ measures may be required to support the conservation of some species and
     populations and are essential to ensuring the sustainable use of many agricultural, forest and
     aquatic resources.

19. The knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous ethnic minorities and local
     communities relevant for the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity should
     be respected; their use and maintenance be subject to their prior informed consent or
     approval and carried out with the support and involvement of these communities; and the
     benefits arising from the utilization of such knowledge, innovations and practices should be
     shared equitably.

20. The conservation of biodiversity and the sustainable use of biological resources will be
     carried out using the best knowledge available and approaches refined as new knowledge is
     gained.

21. Biodiversity-inclusive strategic environmental assessment and environmental impact
     assessment will ensure that development projects are respectful of biodiversity and its
     ecosystem services.

22. The nature of biodiversity is complex and its scope wide. Consequently, there is a need to
     use interdisciplinary, cross-sectoral and multi-scale approaches in addressing it.7

                                                      16
                                                                              National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

III. RATIONALE FOR THE OVERALL STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES

       3.1 Assessment of the implementation of the 2002 National Biodiversity Strategy and

             Action Plan

The 2002 National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan proposed a series of strategic objectives and
priority actions that were addressed under 17 themes corresponding to important sectors in Cambodia.

Under the first theme, Protection of Natural Resources, significant progress has been observed, with 26%
of the national land and inland waters becoming designated as protected areas and conservation areas. In
addition, important legal and policy documents have been approved, including the 2014 Strategic
Framework for National Protected Area System Strategic Management Plan; the 2008 Protected Area
Law, the 2006 Law on Fisheries and the 2002 Law on Forestry. However, generally speaking, the
effectiveness of the management of protected areas and conservation areas has been limited due to
outdated plans or the absence of plans altogether, as well as a lack of PAs zoning and boundary
demarcation. In addition, a critical weakness of the protected area system has been that conservation
activities, especially research projects carried out by NGOs, were essentially funded and somehow driven
externally.

Regarding the Animal Wildlife Resources theme, a sub decree was promulgated on the List of Cambodia's
national animals and tree species. In addition, the following were published: the 2003 Phyto-sanitary
control and other relevant MAFF notifications for protecting some animal species. Little progress was
observed in the implementation of the national monitoring program on invasive alien species, but a 10-
year national strategic and action plan on invasive species was developed.

Under the Freshwater Fisheries and Aquaculture theme, the framework of the 10-year Strategic Plan
2009-2018, the first three-year-rolling on Fishery Sector Development Action Plan 2009-2011, 468
community fisheries, 8 fish sanctuaries, 13 State and 267 private hatcheries operated with 15,000 families
engaged in small-scale aquaculture were developed. Furthermore, aquaculture activities were expanded
and more actions were taken to enhance illegal fishing control8. The inland fish exploitation increased by
10.6% in 2013 compared to the previous year and its growth was around 39% compared to the period
between 2008 and 2012. Similarly, marine fish exploitation increased by 11% and its growth was around
50% compared to 2008-2012. Aquaculture of fish, prawn, crocodile, and fingerling stock hatchery
continue to develop actively9.

Regarding the Coastal and Marine Resources theme, the Cambodian government created an integrated
coastal zone management system in the coastal area to protect the environment and manage the use of
natural resources for sustainable economic development. The government undertook building up the
capacity for fish breeding, giant prawn hatchling technique and promoted aquaculture activities through
stocking of key species, which was contributing to family income.

Under the Forest and Wild Plan Resources theme, the Forest Resource Management and Conservation
Programme included the development of sustainable forest management plans, management systems for
production forests outside of community forests, biodiversity management plans in protected forests, the
conservation of genetic resources from forests and the establishment of seed sources for planting
programs, multi-purpose tree plantations, local forest product development and market promotion, the
expansion of timber processing and the use of more efficient technologies, and forest certification10.

Regarding the Agriculture and Animal Production theme, the MAFF continued to strengthen agricultural
extension services for better cultivation techniques and effective practices, plant protection, the use and
maintenance of agricultural machinery, postharvest and storage technology.

Work under the Energy Resources theme includes an energy efficiency program for households, and the
promotion of fuelwood and multipurpose tree plantations. Progress under this theme has been limited due
to a lack of financial support for implementation.

Good progress has been made under the Mineral Resources theme, through the application of the 1999
sub-decree on environmental impact assessment for hydropower and other energy development prepared
by the MME and all the development projects on energy, hydropower and mine exploration. The MME
cooperated with the Ministry of Environment in conducting the environmental impact assessment to
ensure the sustainability of development projects related to community environment11.

                                                                 17
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Regarding the Industry, Technology and Services theme, Cambodia signed the Cartagena Protocol on
Biosafety in 2003, and adopted its biosafety law in 2007. The National Ecotourism Policy and Strategic
Plan (2010) was developed prioritizing the following regions: Northeast Region, Tonle Sap Multiple Use
Area, Coastal and Cardamom Mountain Region12.

Progress on the Environmental Security theme is limited. However, this did not prevent the adoption of
the Natural Resource and Environmental Protection Law and the Biosafety Law. Both laws contribute to
the prevention of any cause and damage to genetic resources and to biodiversity in general, including
causes or damage from modern biotechnology. The Ministry of Water Resources and Meteorology
(MOWRAM) has implemented the Law on Water Resources and houses a meteorology station.

In terms of Land-use planning, various institutional capacity building programmes were carried out on
land-use planning, including participatory land-use planning, the establishment of the national base map,
and the Master Plan for the national spatial data infrastructure.

Work on the Water Resource theme is in progress. The principle of integrated water resource
management requires coordinated multi-sectoral water use planning. There is also a need to conserve and
maintain biodiversity and its ecosystems, maintain, and construct 141 irrigation system projects; improve
its service quality; minimize the impacts of its developments and operations on the environment and
surrounding communities; collaborate and participate in the management of the Mekong basin,
considering the management of water resources, the sustain biodiversity aquatic and fish life.

In terms of Climate Change and Biodiversity, the following were developed: the 2006 national adaptation
programme of action on climate change, the 1999 first national communication on climate change, and
the 2007 second national communication to the UNFCCC and Cambodia climate change strategic plan
(2014-2023). In addition, priority actions in the NBSAP include the integration of biodiversity objectives
into the future national climate change action plan, improvement of weather forecasts to ensure timely
warnings of natural occurrences and of the meteorological networks, and the lobbying of developed
countries to decrease emissions related to climate change13.

In terms of Community Participation, MOE and MAFF have been promoting and encouraging the
participation of local community members and ethnic groups in events on the conservation and protection
of natural resources. MOE and MAFF are also encouraging the locals living in and around the protected
areas and protected forests to create CPAs, CFs, Community Fisheries Networks, Community based Eco-
tourism Networks, and a Network of Participatory Land-use planning.

In terms of Awareness, Education, Research Coordination and Development, there has been good
progress since MOE has a long standing awareness programme on biodiversity, climate change, and
biosafety through debating on climate change, biosafety, biodiversity and related issues. MAFF also
regularly conducted debates on animal production, fisheries and forestry protection; while provincial
authorities undertook various forms of awareness-raising and trainings on biodiversity conservation at
various locations using both formal and informal forms.

Work on the Legislation and Institutional Structure theme has progressed well. Cambodia passed several
new laws and signed bilateral and multiple agreements, such as the Biosafety Protocol.

Good progress has been noted under the Quality of Life and Poverty Reduction theme, with the
implementation of community-based natural resource management programs in forestry, fishery,
protected areas and participatory land-use planning. The National Information Center was created to
cover indigenous practices in the mountainous highlands and plains, sustainable livelihoods and climate
change mitigation and adaptation. The Ministry of Planning (MOP) developed a commune database that
provides sets of valuable information related to socio-economic trends that are useful for the Cambodia
poverty assessment.

Overall, good progress has been made in the implementation of the 2002 NBSAP, but with many
limitations due to insufficient financial resources and the fact that most of the research activities were
externally driven. These and many other constraints encountered during the implementation of the 2002
NBSAP should be addressed in the updated NBSAP.

                                                                18
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

         3.2 Status of biodiversity as a result of the implementation of the 2002 NBSAP

The 2002 NBSAP provided a starting point to enhance biodiversity understanding and management of
Cambodias biodiversity. As below there may have been some areas of positive improvement and
progress as a result of implementation but far more is needed before a real understanding of Cambodias
Biodiversity status can be made. It is difficult to make any direct correlation between the NBSAP and
Biodiversity Status. This section seeks to identify some of the current knowledge around from
Cambodias 2001 and 2016 National Biodiversity Status Reports.

In response to commitments under the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), a National Biodiversity
Status Report (NBSR) was developed in 2001 to provide a context through stocktaking and assessment of
Cambodias Biodiversity. This, the first, NBSR for Cambodia was captured the areas of biodiversity
values; plant and animal genetic resources, species diversity; ecosystem diversity; and ecosystem diversity
including agricultural, aquatic, forest, and coastal diversities. The NBSR has been slightly modified and
updated in 2015-2016, and below this data has been summarized.

GENETIC DIVERSITY: The first NBSR (2001) provided a very broad overview of genetic diversity in
Cambodia and highlighted the potential significance of genetics in agricultural diversity for domestic
plants and animals and also wild relatives of some domesticated plants and animals. There was limited
in-situ and ex-situ works on genetic diversity in 2001 and while this is still low there are some areas of
improvement. However, based on updated information in NBSR 2016, there is a positive trend toward
increased understanding of genetic diversity and the importance for conservation, although domestic and
commercial plants and animals are still limited used. The initial status of plant genetic diversity was
derived from the FAO Status of Plant Genetic Resources (2000). In-situ conservation was considered
non-existent and the only known ex-situ resources were 2557 accessions of local rice germplasm held by
the International Rice Research Institute in the Phillipines. The updated status was drawn from the
CARDI report Conservation and Utilization of Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture in
Cambodia (2011), showed that there were now ex-sit resources in country has increased including, 3313
accessions (ex-situ at CADRI) and Kbal Koh Vegetable Research Station and has some in-situ
conservation. There are also plans for herbaria and botanical gardens (links with Kew gardens). The first
status of animal genetic diversity drew on the FAO Domestic Animal Diversity Information System
(1998) and Domestic Livestock report by Maclean (1998), highlighted the presence of 4 Cattle species, 3
Pigs, Buffalo, Horse, Goat, Chicken, Duck, Goose, and Turkey. Wild relatives were also identified
including: wild cattle, water buffalo, boar and the Red Jungle Fowl, the wild chicken. The ,,Environmental
Animal Health Monitoring Initiative (RUA/FAO 2011), was referred to in the update and has reinforced
some of the previous status information for domestic animals. In regards to conservation, DNA Sampling
of 69 crocodiles in captivity to identify the pure Fish-eating Hill Crocodile (C. siamensis) crocodiles has
had positive results: 34 Siamese, 32 Hybrid with Estuarine, and 3 Hybrid with Cuban. Fecal DNA studies
of wild elephants have been used to estimate a population 400-600 elephants in Cambodia. The most
positive trend is the innovative use of DNA for crocodile and elephant research, but need more research
on commercial animals and wild relatives.

SPECIES DIVERSITY: Initial status findings provided a very broad overview of species diversity in
Cambodia with some chapters directly from relevant specialists. There were few actual species list
available to compare with, therefore a significant increases in species knowledge, with increased capacity
and research provided a more comprehensive species list. While more is known about species in
Cambodia, new species are still being found and there are significant gaps in invertebrate and plant
species knowledge: the table below shows more comprehensive species lists have been compiled.

Plant Diversity: The first NBSR (2001) cant provide record of Cambodia plant species due to there was
no enough evidence of scientific study and research have been conducted. Although, there were 2308
seed plant has been known in NBSR (2001). In regards to the current status Forestry Administration staff
worked to compile a more thorough list of known plant species for Cambodia. Some data on plants
through a Forestry Administration and Korean project is still being processed, but may provide a
significant increase in documented plant species for Cambodia. Little is known about the status of plant
species while Siamese Rosewood and other luxury timbers have been heavily targeted and are likely to be
in decline. The current update status shown a positive trend toward increasing the plant knowledge and
there are 3113 plant species currently listed for Cambodia.

                                                                19
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Invertebrate Diversity: The original section on invertebrates of NBSP (2001) focused on aquatic macro-
invertebrates. This provided some understanding of some of the major freshwater macro-aquatic
invertebrate families but further highlighted the lack of invertebrate data for Cambodia. The current status
of invertebrates while still weak is an improvement on the past although a range of work from national
and international in-country specialists have been reviewed. The current status is trended toward an
increasing understanding of invertebrate species, however this is the most significant gap area for species.
There are 671 invertebrates currently listed for Cambodia.

Amphibian and Reptile Diversity: Amphibian and reptile were not well study and lack of capacity to
conduct scientific research on its classification have lead to unknown nor record list of theses Cambodian
species, therefore the NBSR (2001) is only able to record 28 reptiles in the commercial list. With ongoing
support, the research on Amphibians and Reptiles has been ably continued by the Ministry of
Environment staff, including the identification of several species new to science and/or Cambodia, . the
trend for reptile and amphibian species understanding is positive and has also been assisted by Fisheries
staff work on sea turtles. In regards to amphibians a guide has been developed and a reptile guide is
currently underway. Optimistically, there is also a trend toward the release of key reptile species back into
the wild. As part of the Cambodia Crocodile Conservation Project, Phnom Tamao Wildlife and Rescue
Centre and Fauna Flora International have released Fish-eating Hill Crocodiles (Crocodylus siamensis),
while the Fisheries Administration have worked with Conservation International to release Cantor's
softshell turtle, (Pelochelys cantorii) and with the Wildlife Conservation Society have released the
Southern River Terrapin (Batagur affinis) back to the wild. With this significant improvement of
knowledge and government efforts with cooperation from national and international organization, there
are 72 amphibians and 173 reptiles currently listed for Cambodia.

Fish Diversity: A non-technical section on fish, which sought to give an overview of knowledge on fish
species status in Cambodia for the 2001 NBSR. There was no delineation made between freshwater and
marine species but it was noted that more data was available for freshwater fish species. The Fisheries
Administration has worked with World Fish and IFReDI in developing a comprehensive fish species list
for Cambodia. The first version of NBSR (2001) was able to record 486 freshwater fish and 357 marine
species in Cambodia. There are growing concerns that the trend in reducing fish species diversity is a sign
of unsustainable harvest and potentially a tipping point for the fishery. Furthermore, there is a trend
toward increased damming of the upstream Mekong and its tributaries, which could further impact fish
species diversity as stream flows and migration routes are altered. As highlighted in Cambodias Fifth
National Report to the Convention on Biological Diversity, the Government has taken quite strong action,
by removing the previous fishing concessions on the Tonle Sap Lake while also promoting aquaculture
and community fisheries. This is a positive trend showing the Governments commitment on biodiversity
conservation for sustainable use and has acknowledged the significance of the fishery to the people and is
acting to better manage the resource. Therefore based on scientific research and specialist, fish diversity
in Cambodia, across both fresh and salt water systems are recorded in 1357 species.

Bird Diversity: The first NBSR section on birds was developed by staff from the Wildlife Conservation
Society. The current NBSR section on birds has been linked to "The Birds of Cambodia: An Annotated
Checklist" (Goes 2013), which is a significant biodiversity resource for Cambodia. Protection of breeding
colonies and nests has been part of the successful approach to conservation used at Prek Toal and in the
northern plains, but has not worked in other sites. The recent decision to abolish all fishing concessions
within the Tonle Sap could also undermine over ten years of successful conservation efforts through
unrestricted access to flooded forest areas formerly protected for commercial fishing had led to increased
disturbance and resurgence of egg and chick collection. In addition to these setbacks, bird conservation
actions must increasingly encounter new challenges. Rapid development has shifted threats from local and
species-focused issues to those associated with landscape-level changes. The latter come in various forms
(e.g., grassland conversion to rice cultivation; the leasing of large forest areas for commercial plantations;
and the construction of hydroelectric dams), but invariably create large-scale threats to habitats and the
wildlife those habitats support. Birds seem to be the most well researched of the species lists, but even
recently a new species was identified in Phnom Penh. There are 601 bird species currently listed for
Cambodia, with 7 on the new global Evolutionally Distinct and Globally Endangered (EDGE) list, while
NBSR (2001) presented only around 500 bird has been recorded.

Mammal Diversity: The first NBSR (2001) separated terrestrial and marine mammals, and the report
noted only around 100 mammals were recorded. This section was a mix between providing a basic

                                                                20
                                   National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

understanding of mammals, while also providing some information of their status at the time. The
previous mammal data, which includes the now questionable KTing Vor, place greater importance on
setting an agreed national mammal list. New mammal species are still being uncovered in Cambodia, and
Fauna Flora International staff helped to highlight some of the specialist work on bats, for which 72
species have now been identified, which is more than the total for mammals in 2001. There have been
significant mammal finds since 2001, which seem likely to continue, but with fewer new mammal species
expected. In 2008, a Wildife Conservation Society survey of the Seima Protected Forest identified
previously unknown and internationally significant populations of black-shanked doucs and yellow-
cheeked crested gibbons. While there has been important mammal research it has not been systematically
collected and has not been effectively shared among relevant stakeholders. The decline in Dugong and
River Dolphins are concerning indicators for marine mammals in Cambodia. There is a need for
classification standards and national discussions around the mammal list including potential extinctions
such as Kouprey. The current status of mammal diversity in Cambodia, across both terrestrial and marine

systems includes 162 species.

No. Species            Data Collected           Overall %
 1 Plants                                          2016
                       2001               2016
                                                  50.5%
                       2308               3113

2 Invertebrates        no record          671   11%
                                                 1%
3 Amphibians           no record          72     3%
                                                22%
4  Reptiles            28 for commercial  173   10%
                                                2.5%
5 Fishes               843 1357

6 Birds                around 500         601

7 Mammals              Around 100         162
                Total                     6149

ECOSYSTEM SUMMARY: The 2001 NBSR provided a broad overview of ecosystem diversity, but
due to lack of data there was more emphasis on the theory than actual status of agricultural, wetland,
forest, and coastal ecosystems. In the absence of hard data, the previous status report developed the initial
concepts of ecosystem services. The improving national land-use mapping greatly assists an overview of
ecosystems but this is limited due to the lack of agreed definitions, and limited research. The Ministry of
Environment has started to highlight ecosystems and their services, but this is still as a major gap area.
Furthermore, within the ecosystems there are smaller habitats such as Karst areas of high biodiversity
potential, but these are vulnerable to disturbance. As a generalized statement, the overall trend in
ecosystems has seen a shift toward more human use of ecosystems: increasing agricultural, commercial
and extactive use.

The National Biodiversity Status reports seek to identify the status and current trends for Cambodias
Biodiversity. With the time and resources available only an overview is possible but from the data
collected it is clear that there is now growing understanding of Cambodias biodiversity, but still
significant gaps in data and coordination. There are some individuals that mostly through their own
passion have greatly helped to provide a clearer picture of Cambodias diversity. New programs such as
the RUPP Masters in Conservation, Centre for Biodiversity Conservation and the Cambodian Journal of
Natural History are very positive developments. This data needs to be better consolidated and shared
within Government in support of biodiversity management; the Clearing House Mechanism and National
Biodiversity Status Report Update should help with this.

There is difficulty in stating biodiversity trends as the current and previous data-sets for species numbers
provide some broad ideas about what might be happening rather than specific trends. Overall, while data
is still deficient there is a positive trend in greater understanding of species, but how they function

                                                                21
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

together as part of an ecosystem and their services is poorly known. As stated in Cambodias Fifth
National Report to the CBD, all habitats are being negatively impacted and as such there may also be
negative impact on ecosystem services, the diversity of species and genetic diversity. More strategic,
consolidating and collaborative, rather than ad-hoc and isolated, research, and actions are needed for
Cambodias biodiversity status to be better understood.
In conclusion, the NBSR (2016) update has highlighted some progress, which may be related to actions
proposed in the previous NBSAP (2002). In regards to genetic diversity there can be seen to be a
significant increase in Cambodias ownership and understanding in plant genetic diversity, and with the
support of international partners modern use of DNA is assisting in animal genetic diversity conservation
efforts. As per the table above there is a positive trend toward increased species numbers across all
sectors, even surpassing some of the estimates made in the 2001 NBSR. Significantly, species
information is also being more widely shared through the Governments Biodiversity Clearing House
Mechanism. The ecosystem summary showed that this sector needs more support but increased
ecosystem services attention and more landscape-based activities are hoped to support increased
ecosystem understanding. Overall, there has been some progress and through this NBSAP the Royal
Government of Cambodia hopes to continue to strengthen biodiversity understanding and management.

                                                                22
                                                                              National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

IV. NATIONAL ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTING THE OVERALL OBJECTIVES
       OF THE NBSAP: THEMATIC APPROACH

The 2002 NBSAP used a sectoral approach to identify the priority actions required for achieving the
vision, mission and strategic objectives of the strategy. Seventeen themes were identified according to the
sectors in which the Cambodian society is involved. The 2009 National Sustainable Development
Strategy partly used a similar approach while considering the strategic areas for sustainable development
in Cambodia. However, even if the sectoral approach was selected as a practical way to develop and
implement the NBSAP, it was recognized that biodiversity, being cross-sectoral, would have many areas
of overlap among the themes, and that these overlaps were to be considered more as complementary
rather than as reasons for unnecessary duplication in implementation. In this updated NBSAP,
opportunities for synergies in implementation of the various themes have been highlighted.

The fifth National Report submitted in 2014 under the Convention on Biological Diversity summarizes
some of the key activities achieved in implementing Cambodias 2002 NBSAP. Both reports conclude
that, overall, the 2002 NBSAP has only partially been implemented. In addition, an assessment of the
implementation of the priority actions contained in the 2002 NBSAP was carried out in the framework of
the review, as was the updating of the NBSAP, as reported in Section 3.1 above.

                 GROUP 1: PROTECTION OF BIODIVERSITY (Themes 1 to 8)

                                      Theme 1: Protected Area System

1. Background

Under this theme, the 2002 NBSAP lists a number of issues in relation to the protection of biodiversity.
There are 11 strategic objectives and related indicators, as well as 11 priority actions. The assessment of
the achievement of these priority actions indicates that:

          (a) Each of the issues identified in 2002 has been addressed and each of the strategic objectives
                and priority actions has been undertaken.

          (b) Progress was recognized in the establishment of Community Protected Areas, the
                demarcation of some protected areas and the conservation or restoration of biologically
                important habitats/ecosystems/landscapes, especially mangroves, coral reefs and sea grass.
                Four Ramsar sites have been designated, as well as the Tonle Sap Biosphere reserve and a
                number of Important Bird Areas. Community Protected Areas, Fisheries and Forestry have
                been increasingly promoted.

          (c) The country has also adopted a number of laws and established goals and plans of relevance
                to the Protected Area System. These include the following (see Annex 1 for a more detailed
                list):

                 (i) The 2008 Protected Area Law, which defines the framework of management,
                         conservation and development of protected areas under the administration of MOE,
                         and which is also relevant to conservation areas under MAFF;

                (ii) The National Strategic Development Plan, and its Update 2009-2013. In Chapter IV
                         (Key Policy Priorities and Actions: 2009-2013), the Plan contains policy priorities
                         that support the establishment of protected areas and protected forests with the
                         objectives, among others, to conserve biodiversity, improve the livelihoods of people
                         living in rural areas and contribute to economic growth;

               (iii) Chapters 4, 5 and 6 in the 2006 Law on Fisheries present approaches to protect and
                         conserve fisheries in inland and marine waters, in general, and more specifically in
                         inundated forests and mangrove forests;

                (iv) Article 23 of the 2007 Law on Water Resources Management of the Kingdom of
                         Cambodia states that when a watershed is degraded by human activities or natural
                         causes, the MOWRAM has the authority to declare it a protected "water use" zone;

                (v) The 2002 Forestry Law, which defines the framework for management, harvesting,
                         use, development and conservation of the forests in the Kingdom of Cambodia. The
                         objective of this law is to ensure sustainable management of these forests for their

                                                                 23
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                         social, economic and environmental benefit, including conservation of biological
                         diversity and cultural heritage. The management of forests are under the general
                         jurisdiction of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF). The areas
                         of Forest Protection and all kinds of wildlife species are under the management,
                         research and conservation of the Forestry Administration, except for fish and animal
                         that breed in water;

         (d) MOE and MAFF have collaborated with development partners and natural resource
               management and environmental NGOs to support conservation efforts in protected areas and
               other conservation areas;

         (e) While terrestrial protected areas have reached about 26% of the countrys land area and 8
               fish sanctuaries have been established, no national marine protected area has yet been
               officially designated. However the MOE has plans to conduct a feasibility study on the
               establishment of marine protected areas in Koh Rong and the coastal areas around Sihanouk
               Ville. There is, moreover, the need to (i) develop or update management plans and ensure
               implementation of those plans for effectiveness in protected areas and other conservation
               areas; (ii) integrate those areas into wider landscapes and seascapes; and (iii) ensure the
               contributions of each of those areas to the national economy and the well-being of all,
               especially local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities;

         (f) Cambodia has seven ecoregions that occur entirely or partly within its borders including: (i)
               Tonle Sap freshwater swamp forests, (ii) Tonle Sap-Mekong peat swamp forests, (iii)
               Central Indochina dry forests, (iv) Cardamom Mountains rain forests, (v) Indochina
               mangroves, (vi) Southeastern Indochina dry evergreen forests, and (vii) Southern Annamites
               montane rain forests. Based on the August 2014 WDPA data, each of these ecoregions has
               been afforded between 20% and 62% protection status, except the Tonle Sap-Mekong peat
               swamp forests, of which only 0.6% is protected. More than 90% of those swamp forests have
               been converted to scrub or degraded forests. Intensive agriculture and the alteration of the
               hydrodynamics of the river systems in the region have altered the natural river fluctuations,
               adversely affecting the remaining native vegetation. Protection of this ecoregion has to be
               extended. In addition, most Important Bird Areas (IBA) are covered by protected areas,
               although the following IBA sites are in critical condition due to agricultural expansion and
               intensification, human intrusions and disturbances, energy production and mining,
               overexploitation of some species and, in particular, wood harvesting and collection of non-
               timber products: Kampong Trach, Lomphat, Sesan River, Stung / Chi Kreng / Kampong
               Svay and Western Siem Pang. Only 0.2% of the Gulf of Thailand, a large marine ecosystem
               is protected, and there is a need to expand protection as a matter of priority.

         (g) Despite the conservation measures taken, many species continue to be threatened and climate
               change has already started to cause species range shifts, often across national borders;

         (h) Limited financial resources and local/national expertise were identified as the primary causes
               of limited implementation of the 2002 NBSAP objectives relating to protected areas. A lack
               of awareness of the values of protected areas and conservation areas, including of their
               potential as sources of revenue, has also limited the allocation of budgets, human resources
               and equipment to the implementation of recommended actions.

Currently, the network of 23 protected areas, under the management of the Ministry of Environment
(MOE) through its General Directorate of Administration for Nature Conservation and Protection
(GDANCP), 6 protected forests and 8 fish sanctuaries, under the management of the Ministry of
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF) through the Forest Administration (FA) and Fisheries
Administration (FiA) respectively covers about 26% of the countrys land area.

Cambodias protected area system is under considerable pressure. There are obstacles to the
establishment of new protected areas and conservation areas, and some of the designated protected areas
and conservation areas are ineffective, particularly because of the lack of management plans, as well as
shortages in skilled staff and insufficient budget allocations.

In accordance with chapter V of the 2008 Protected Area Law, the GDANCP started work in 2013 on the
national strategic management plan expected to guide the development of action plans for individual

                                                                24
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

protected areas and other conservation areas. As a first step, the GDANCP developed a framework that
contained, among other elements, guiding principles and links to other government priorities. One of the
objectives of the framework is to allow coherence in the implementation of sectoral policies and plans,
bearing in mind the diversity in the ecological types and governance of individual protected areas and
other conservation areas.

In August and September 2013, representatives of the different departments of the Ministry of the
Environment and the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, and representatives of local
communities and of partner international and non-governmental organizations participated in drafting the
strategic framework that was adopted by the National Biodiversity Steering Committee (NBSC) on 18
February 2014. In addition to considerations regarding the development and implementation of protected
area and other conservation area management plans, the strategic framework also incorporates aspects
that contribute to making protected areas and other conservation areas in Cambodia a comprehensive
system that is fully resilient to present and future pressures, including in particular, climate change, and
that may ensure an effective and efficient protection of the countrys natural capital and its provision of
ecosystem services. This framework is the basis of the strategic objectives and key actions, which are
identified, in this updated NBSAP.

2. Issues

The following key issues were identified for consideration in this updated NBSAP:

Regarding knowledge base
         (a) Limited information to support decision-making, including on climate change, its present
               and future impacts and experience with climate change ecosystem-based mitigation;

         (b) Climate change according to the 2007 assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
               Climate Change is one of the principal threats to biodiversity and the functioning of
               protected areas and conservation areas;

         (c) Lack of research and monitoring capacity to provide regular assessment of status and trends
               of biodiversity and to follow up on threatened species and trends in the level of threats.

In relation to progress in implementing plans:

         (a) Limited or ineffective programmes on raising awareness about the role and importance of
               protected areas and other conservation areas as well as their functions;

         (b) Field management and patrolling problems associated with insufficient resources and
               rangers;

         (c) Unclear or incomplete zoning and boundary demarcations;

         (d) Increasing pressures on protected areas and other conservation areas as a result of increasing
               population, global trading that often leads to overharvesting of natural resources (e.g., in
               term of high-priced timber species and non-timber forest products), road-building,
               unmanaged tourism, urbanization, other infrastructure development, and expansion in
               forestry, agriculture (shifting agriculture, land encroachment) and fisheries;

         (e) Illegal activities such as illegal logging, fishing, hunting and harvesting of flooded forests;
               wildlife poaching and ill-conceived expansion in some cases of large-scale agro-industrial
               land encouraged by the countrys land concession policies;

         (f) Conflicts with local populations.

Regarding the enabling environment

         (a) Weak legal underpinnings (e.g., uncertainties in land tenure), institutional frameworks
               and law enforcement;

         (b) Lack of planning (management plans);

         (c) Limited participation, cooperation and coordination with local communities and
               relevant stakeholders, including in sectors other than biodiversity;

         (d) Social and political constraints;

                                                                25
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

         (e) Lack of financial resources for effective management of protected areas, for the
               recovery and protection of threatened species, and for establishing and maintaining ex-
               situ conservation facilities;

         (f) Lack of adequate technical expertise and human resources.

These issues are essentially the same as those recorded in 2002, although most of them have begun to be
addressed, especially after the adoption of the 2008 Protected Area Law that provides some guidance on
requirements. The Government has also recently adopted the National Protected Area System Strategic
Management Framework (NPASSMF), which contains guidance on managing protected areas and other
conservation areas as a system rather than as single separate areas that must "survive" on their own. The
NPASSMF precedes the development of the national strategic management plan that is stipulated in
chapter V of the 2008 Protected Area Law and links to other government priorities. The Framework was
developed to enhance coherence in the implementation of sectoral policies and plans of relevance to the
conservation of biodiversity. The national strategic management plan is expected to guide the
development of action plans for individual protected areas and conservation areas in the country.

3. Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues:

         (a) Strategic Objective 1: Strengthen the knowledge of the national protected area system
               for decision-making by conducting assessments, enhancing understanding, organizing and
               disseminating information, and raising awareness of the functions, roles, values and
               requirements of species in-situ conservation, protected areas and/or other conservation areas
               throughout Cambodia;

         (b) Strategic objective 2: Accelerate the implementation of Cambodias obligations in
               compliance with Aichi Biodiversity Target 11 and other relevant targets of the Strategic Plan
               for Biodiversity 2011-2020 as they have been translated in this National Biodiversity
               Strategy and Action Plan14. Particular efforts should be made to achieve those goals that are
               lagging behind in the implementation of the programme of work on protected areas adopted
               under the Convention on Biological Diversity and relevant commitments made in the
               countrys plan of action on protected areas. Implementation of this strategic objective will
               take into account the Sustainable Development Goals that the country will adopt and other
               conventions ratified by Cambodia, including, in particular, the United Nations Framework
               Convention on Climate Change, the World Heritage Convention and the Ramsar Convention
               on Wetlands;

         (c) Strategic objective 3: Strengthen the enabling environment through diversified governance,
               enhanced participation, increased coordination and cooperation among stakeholders at the
               national, regional and global levels, and enhanced human, institutional, technological and
               sustainable financial capacities.

Implementation of actions under this theme on the "Protected Area System" will be in coordination with,
and strengthened by actions under other themes addressing landscape and seascape planning and
management, and will be guided by the ecosystem approach (themes under Group 1 on "Protection of
Biodiversity") and the principles for the sustainable use of natural resources (themes under Group 2 on
"Sustainable use of Biodiversity"). The Protected Area System theme will also respond to the requirement
for the protection of natural habitats and the protection and recovery of threatened species. It will also be
particularly relevant to ecosystem restoration activities. Actions relating to the strengthening of the
enabling environment for the Protected Area System are described in detail under the themes in Group 3
on "Enabling environment". Each of the actions listed in Table 5 is required, as well, for the achievement
of Cambodia Biodiversity Target 8 and is relevant to the implementation of many other targets,
particularly those concerned with enhanced management of biological resources and conservation of
ecosystems under anthropogenic pressures.

                                                                26
                                                                                                  National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Table 5: Key actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their implementation under the theme on "Protected Area System"

Strategic objectives                                                                 Key actions                                                                      Coordinating
                                                                                                                                                                    and participating

                                                                                                                                                                      ministries and
                                                                                                                                                                         agencies

Strategic objective 1:                                            1.1 Conduct assessments on important aspects of protected areas and conservation areas,           MOE, MAFF,
                                                                       including their coverage and location; the ecological gaps in their representativeness;
Strengthen the knowledge of the national protected                     their values and importance; their connectivity and integration into wider landscapes        [
area system for decision-making by conducting                          and seascapes; their governance systems, whether management is governed by plans
assessments, enhancing understanding, organizing and                   that have been adopted, the effectiveness and equity of their management; their              TSA, GSSD
disseminating information and raising awareness of the                 capacity requirements, threats and barriers to their effective management; their
functions, roles, values and requirements of species in-situ           environmental and biodiversity policy environment and the sustainability of their
conservation, protected areas and/or conservation areas                finances. In particular, conduct economic evaluations and assessments of resources for
throughout Cambodia.                                                   the potential development of revenue-based activities within protected areas, including
                                                                       ecotourism development in protected areas and buffer zone management with
                                                                       community benefits.

                                                                  1.2 Enhance understanding and organize into user-friendly databases the information on the MOE, MAFF,

                                                                  functions, roles, values and requirements of protected areas and other conservation               TSA, GSSD

                                                                  areas, considered individually and as a system in Cambodia.

                                                                  1.3 Ensure that information of relevance to decision-making is widely accessible and that it MOE, MAFF

                                                                  raises awareness.                                                                                 GSSD

Strategic objective 2:                                            Bearing in mind the need to:

Accelerate the implementation of Cambodia's                            (a) Achieve conservation of biodiversity and ecosystem services within the national
obligations in compliance with Aichi Biodiversity Target                     protected area system, rehabilitation of degraded protected areas and other
11 and other relevant targets of the Strategic Plan for                      conservation areas or degraded zones within those areas, prevention and
Biodiversity 2011-2020 as they have been translated in                       suppression of illegal activities and invasive alien species, and sustainable use of
this National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan.                         natural resources and ecosystem services within individual protected areas and
Particular efforts should be made to achieve those goals                     other conservation areas in line with Article 16.1 of the 2008 Protected Area Law
that are lagging behind in the implementation of the                         and other relevant laws, including, in particular, the Forestry Law and the Fisheries
programme of work on protected areas adopted under the                       Law; and
Convention on Biological Diversity and relevant
commitments made in the countrys plan of action on                     (b) Enhance the contributions of protected areas and conservation areas, considered
protected areas. Implementation of this strategic objective                  individually or as a system, to the implementation of Cambodias sustainable
will take into account the Sustainable Development Goals                     development goals, especially, poverty reduction and eradication.

                                                              27
                                                                                               National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

that the country will adopt and other conventions ratified      It is essential to develop and implement an action plan for each protected area, each
by Cambodia, including in particular the United Nations         conservation area, and the entire network of protected areas and other conservation areas in
Framework Convention on Climate Change, the World               Cambodia that will include, inter alia, ways and means to:
Heritage Convention and the Ramsar Convention on
Wetlands.                                                       2.1 Maintain and, as required, rehabilitate existing protected areas, other conservation            MOE, GSSD,
                                                                     areas and the entire national protected area system;                                           MAFF

                                                                2.2 Identify and create new protected areas and/or other new conservation areas, including:         MOE, GSSD,
                                                                                                                                                                    MAFF
                                                                      (i) Areas of particular national, regional or global importance for biodiversity and
                                                                            the delivery of ecosystem services, with a particular focus on areas that are
                                                                            naturally resilient to climate change and that can serve as refugia to species that
                                                                            will be misplaced by climate change in the future;

                                                                      (ii) Areas that are considered to be part of the countrys natural and cultural heritage; and

                                                                      (iii) Ecologically representative areas.

                                                                      In particular, identify and designate new protected areas within wetlands, and marine
                                                                      and coastal habitats.

                                                                     While the creation of new protected areas and other conservation areas shall be
                                                                     considered only when the gap analysis has clearly demonstrated a critical need,
                                                                     enhancement of management effectiveness and efficiency (action 2.3) is among the
                                                                     priority actions.

                                                                2.3 Enhance management effectiveness and efficiency and, in particular, strengthen the on-          MOE, GSSD
                                                                     going management of designated protected areas by developing and enforcing                     MAFF, MRD,
                                                                     management policies, guidelines and plans, and ensure that protected areas implement           MLMUPC and
                                                                     a Conservation Assured approach.                                                               MOI

                                                                2.4 Ensure equity in decision-making processes and benefit sharing with special attention MOE, GSSD and

                                                                to the most vulnerable group.                                                                       MAFF

                                                                2.5 Ensure connectivity among protected areas through corridors and/or stepping stones,             MOE, GSSD,
                                                                     bearing in mind the ecosystem approach                                                         MAFF and TSA

                                                                2.6 Integrate protected areas into wider landscapes and seascapes, and strengthen and
                                                                     create transboundary protected areas, also bearing in mind climate change

                                                            28
                                                                                                                   National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                                               2.7 Integrate protected areas and other conservation areas within sector strategies and       MOE, GSSD,
                                                                    policies and wider plans and programmes, including Reducing Emissions from               MAFF and
                                                                    Deforestation and Forest Degradation "plus" (REDD+), other payments for ecosystem        CNMC
                                                                    services (PES), environmental impact assessments (EIA), and strategies or policies for
                                                                    nature-based tourism, forestry, fisheries, agriculture, energy, transportation, climate
                                                                    change, green economy and Cambodias sustainable development goals.

                                                                    As a matter of priority, integrate the management of the Tonle Sap Biosphere Core
                                                                    Zones with the management of the whole Tonle Sap Biosphere Reserve, using the
                                                                    ecosystem approach and the principles for sustainable use of biological diversity.
                                                                    Incorporate management of biosphere reserves, community fisheries management,
                                                                    boundary demarcation, commercial fisheries management, wildlife and fisheries
                                                                    monitoring, land security, cross-institutional communication and coordination, field
                                                                    staff and community training program, environmental education and awareness, and
                                                                    local governance. The inviolate core zone in the Mondulkiri Protected Forest needs to
                                                                    be clearly demarcated.

                                                               2.8 Implement additional specific provisions from relevant regional and international         MOE, GSSD
                                                                    agreements.                                                                              MAFF and TSA

Strategic objective 3:                                         3.1 Enhance participation and diversify governance                                            MOE, GSSD,
                                                                                                                                                             MAFF
Strengthen the enabling environment through
diversified governance, enhanced participation, increased      3.2 Increase coordination and cooperation among stakeholders at the national, regional and MOE, GSSD,
coordination and cooperation among stakeholders at the
national, regional and global levels, and enhanced human,      global levels                                                                                 MAFF
institutional, technological and sustainable financial
capacities.                                                    3.3 Enhance human capacities. As a matter of priority, conduct training programs targeted     MOE, GSSD,
                                                                    for park rangers, technical staff, protected areas directors, local communities,         MAFF
                                                                    indigenous ethnic minorities and other stakeholders

                                                               3.4 Enhance institutional and legislative capacities, and strengthen and interconnect         MOE, GSSD,
                                                                    protected area law enforcement efforts at the local, regional and national levels.       MAFF

                                                               3.5 Review and amend legislations related to natural resources management to ensure the       MOE, GSSD,
                                                                    list of protected species mirrors the IUCN Red List threat categories.                   MAFF

                                                               3.6 Enhance technological capacities, as well as the mechanisms for technology                MOE, GSSD,
                                                                    acquisition, adaptation and transfer.                                                    MAFF

                                                           29
                                                                  National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

    3.7 Enhance flora and fauna research within protected areas.                               MOE, GSSD,
                                                                                               MAFF

    3.8 Research and support the establishment and management of new community protected MOE, GSSD,

    areas.                                                                                     MAFF

    3.9 Enhance the participation of local communities and local authorities in the planning,  MOE, GSSD,
         design and management of the countrys protected area system.                          MAFF

    3.10 Enhance sustainable financing capacities.                                             MOE, GSSD

30
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                        Theme 2: Threatened Species
1. Background
The 2002 NBSAP identified three strategic objectives and four priority actions that are on-going under
theme 2 on threatened species. MOE and MAFF are collaborating with development partners and
environmental NGOs on a range of relevant biodiversity related programmes, including "endangered
species action plans", the establishment of a Southern Cardamom Biodiversity (elephant) Corridor,
"Mekong Giant Catfish and Dolphin protection programmes," "Development of Elephant Conservation
Action Plan," "Cambodia Crocodile Conservation Action Plan," and "Tiger Action Plan: Monitoring of
Tigers and their Prey". The implementation of the strategic objectives under this theme has only been
partial because of limited government capacity and resources, financial resources, trained plant and
animal taxonomists, technical support and awareness-raising programmes.
2. Issues
The following issues have been identified as the most critical:

         (a) Lack of qualified plant and animal taxonomists;
         (b) Absence of comprehensive data covering all groups of animals and plants;
         (c) Insufficient support from decision-makers and inadequate financial resources; and
         (d) Methodological difficulties including, especially, data acquisition and management.
3. Strategic objectives
The following strategic objectives were adopted to address these issues:
         (a) Strategic objective 1: Improve the knowledge of the threatened species status and trends;
         (b) Strategic objective 2: Identify and describe the direct and indirect factors threatening species

               and ways and means to address species threatened status; and
         (c) Strategic objective 3: Strengthen the enabling environment for addressing threatened species.
Several actions described under the other themes, including Theme 1 on "protected areas system and in-
situ conservation", Theme 3 on "ex-situ conservation" and Theme 6 on "land-use planning and
management of biological resources", will contribute to the protection and recovery of threatened species.
The actions that are highlighted in Table 6 are required to meet the Cambodia Biodiversity Target in
which all species of threatened fauna and flora will have to be identified and their status improved
significantly by 2020. These actions will contribute to the achievement of Target 4 regarding aquatic
threatened species as well.

                                                                31
                                                                                                       National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Table 6: Key actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their implementation under the theme on "Threatened Species"

Strategic Objectives                                       Key Actions                                                                           Coordinating and
                                                                                                                                                    participating
                                                                                                                                                   ministries and
                                                                                                                                                       agencies

Strategic Objective 1:                                     1.1 Assess the current status of biodiversity at the genetic, species/ population/    MAFF, GSSD, MOE
                                                                community, and ecosystem/habitat levels, especially in protected areas and
Improve the knowledge of the threatened species status          protected forest, Important Bird Areas (IBA) and Key Biodiversity Areas
and trends.                                                     (KBA), and apply IUCN Red List criteria to produce a national red lists.

                                                           1.2 Conduct basic and applied research for better understanding and improved          MAFF and MOE,
                                                                knowledge of the status, trends and dynamics of the components of biodiversity   GSSD
                                                                and organize that information into databases and through the national clearing-
                                                                house mechanism.

                                                           1.3 Assess ecological and socioeconomic consequences of the loss of species.          MAFF, GSSD, and
                                                                                                                                                 MOE

                                                           1.4 Build and strengthen technical capacities of taxonomists and para-taxonomists GSSD, MAFF,

                                                           associated with plant and animal taxonomy.                                            MOE, MOEYS

Strategic objective 2:                                     2.1 Conduct research on drivers of, essentially pressures on, the components of       MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                biodiversity, including invasive alien species, habitat fragmentation and
Identify and describe the direct and indirect factors           degradation, overexploitation, pollution, climate change and natural disasters.
threatening species and ways and means to address               Consider in particular the status and evolution of species vulnerability in the
species' threatened status.                                     face of climate change.

                                                           2.2 Develop and implement plans and programmes for the recovery of threatened         GSSD, MAFF and
                                                                species and their reintroduction. A particular emphasis should be on critically  MOE
                                                                endangered vertebrates among the Asian Species Action Partnership species in
                                                                Cambodia.

                                                           2.3 Develop and implement programmes for the prevention of the introduction and       GSSD, MAFF and
                                                                establishment of invasive alien species threatening other species and for the    MOE
                                                                control of their spread as well as their eradication.

                                                       32
                                                                                                 National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                                        2.4 Rehabilitate and restore degraded ecosystems/habitats for the recovery and    GSSD, MAFF and
                                                             reestablishment of threatened species.                                       MOE

                                                        2.5 Establish ex situ conservation facilities including zoos, botanical gardens,  GSSD, MAFF and
                                                             germplasm conservation facilities and DNA Gene-banks.                        MOE, GSSD

Strategic objective 3:                                  3.1 Develop programmes for monitoring threatened species.                         MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                                                                                          and MOP
Strengthen the enabling environment for addressing
threatened species.                                     3.2 Strengthen cooperation for technology transfer (e.g. on biogeographical       MAFF and MOE,

                                                        mapping technologies, population distribution, biotechnology), including access GSSD

                                                        to traditional knowledge and resources.

                                                        3.3 Integrate threatened species issues in training programmes for staff and in   MAFF and MOE,
                                                             education curriculums and enhance public awareness of threatened species.    GSSD

                                                        3.4 Develop practical plans for mobilizing financial resources and expertise on   MAFF and MOE,
                                                             threatened species.                                                          GSSD

                                                        3.5 Ensure protected areas supporting threatened species are effectively managed  MOE and MAFF,
                                                             and resourced.                                                               GSSD

                                                        3.6 Strengthen law enforcement and practices that are favourable to threatened    MAFF, MOE, TSA,
                                                             species.                                                                     GSSD

                                                    33
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                       Theme 3: Ex situ Conservation

1. Background
Under this theme, the 2002 NBSAP had three strategic objectives and four priority actions. MoE and
MAFF had a leading role in these actions: they identified and collected plant species and cultivars
requiring protection, they established a National Botanical Garden and a general herbarium, and they
strengthened capacity in wildlife husbandry techniques for use in the Phnom Tamao Wildlife Rescue
Centre, other ex-situ conservation areas and private zoological parks.
Following the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, the Phnom Tamao Zoological Park and Wildlife Rescue
Centre and private zoos, as well as the Cambodian herbarium of the Royal University of Phnom Penh
were established in the country. MOE and MAFF continued conserving existing plant genetic resources
in gene banks, greenhouses and on-farm, as well as the collection of insect species infesting crops. These
ex-situ collections were established not only to conserve species and their genetic heritage in a suitable
environment, but also to contribute to public awareness of the importance of biodiversity and to raise
funds for conservation projects. They also provide material for scientific research.
The establishment of a national herbarium is underway, but ongoing ex situ conservation activities require
additional financial and human resources.
2. Issues
The primary factors identified as delaying the achievement of the objectives under this theme include: the
lack of adequate infrastructure and qualified staff, insufficient funds, scientific data and research finding
evidence.
3. Strategic objectives
The following objectives have been identified to address these issues:

         (a) Strategic Objective 1: Develop and strengthen ex situ conservation areas and facilities. It is
               stated in the preamble of the CBD text that the fundamental requirement for the conservation
               of biological diversity is the in-situ conservation of ecosystems and natural habitats and the
               maintenance and recovery of viable populations of species in their natural surroundings.
               Since ex-situ conservation measures and facilities complement in-situ conservation, this
               theme is complementary to Theme 1 on protected area and in-situ conservation, and the
               actions that are listed in Table 7 will contribute to the achievement of Cambodia Biodiversity
               Targets 1, 5, 10, 19 and 20;

         (b) Strategic Objective 2: Recover species and populations. Reintroduction of captive-bred
               species to re-establish populations of endangered or rare plants and animals in the original
               habitat is necessary;

         (c) Strategic Objective 3: Building capacity for the establishment and maintenance of the
               National Botanical Garden, National Herbarium, Aquarium, and other ex-situ conservation
               areas.

                                                                34
                                                                        National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Table 7: Key actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their implementation under the theme on "Ex-situ Conservation"

Strategic Objectives                                       Key Actions                                                                                 Coordinating and
                                                                                                                                                    participating ministries

                                                                                                                                                           and agencies

Strategic Objective 1:                                     1.1 Establish a National Botanical Garden and related facilities for research and        MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                training on plants, animals and related pests.
Develop and strengthen ex situ conservation areas and
facilities.                                                1.2 Establish a national herbarium and related facilities for research and training on plants MAFF, MOE, GSSD

                                                           1.3 Strengthen the management of Phnom Tamao Zoological Park and Wildlife                MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                Rescue Centre and establish related facilities for research and training.

                                                           1.4 Identify and collect plant species and cultivars requiring protection for ex- situ MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                conservation, reproduction and propagation

                                                           1.5 Adopt measures and establish facilities for the recovery and rehabilitation of       MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                threatened plant and animal species in preparation for their reintroduction into
                                                                their natural habitats. In particular, assess the requirements and develop captive
                                                                breeding programs for Critically Endangered Asian Vertebrates among the
                                                                Asian Species Action Partnership species in Cambodia (particularly reptiles)

                                                           1.6 Develop and implement a training program in animal husbandry techniques for          MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                the staff of the Phnom Tamao Zoological Park and Wildlife Rescue Centre and
                                                                other ex-situ conservation areas.

                                                           1.7 Develop practical plans for mobilizing the required funds.                           MAFF, MOE, GSSD

                                                           1.8 Explore and take measures combining in-situ and ex-situ conservation for species     MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                having small wild populations and/or a weak ability to survive and reproduce.

Strategic Objective 2:                                     2.1 Recover and/or maintain endangered and rare species in ex-situ facilities.           MAFF, MOE, GSSD
Recover species and populations.
                                                           2.2 Develop and implement reintroduction programmes to release captive-bred              MAFF, MOE, GSSD

                                                           species back into the wild choosing an area they inhabited historically. The

                                                           objective of such programmes is to establish a new population in the original or

                                                       35
                                                                               National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                                         similar environment.

                                                         2.3 Promote augmentation programs by releasing individuals into existing            GSSD, MOE, MAFF
                                                              populations to increase their size and genetic diversity.

                                                         2.4 Carry out programs to establish animal or plant populations outside their       MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                              historic ranges.

                                                         2.5 Establish gene banks for the conservation of sperm and natural gene banks for GSSD, MOE, MAFF
                                                              the research and conservation of endangered species.

Strategic Objective 3:                                   3.1 Build capacity of local experts for the collections and maintenance of ex-situ  MOE, GSSD
                                                              materials and specimens, including, among other things, the introduction of    GSSD, MOE
Build capacity for the establishment and maintenance of       techniques and methods for plant and genetic resources conservation.
the National Botanical Garden, National Herbarium,
Aquarium, and other ex-situ conservation areas.          3.2 Enhance regional and international cooperation on scientific and technology
                                                              transfer on ex-situ conservation and management.

                                                         3.3 Collect and disseminate biodiversity outreach materials for the ex-situ         GSSD, MOE
                                                              conservation of critically endangered and threatened species.

                                                         3.4 Encourage and support young taxonomists in their field research and laboratory GSSD, MOE
                                                              work.

36
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                        Theme 4: Sustainable Mining

1. Background

Mineral resources in Cambodia include bauxite, carbonate rocks, natural gas, gemstones, gold,
manganese, petroleum, phosphate rock, salt, silica, and zircon. With the exception of carbonate rocks and
gemstones, the country's mineral resources are largely unexploited. To attract domestic and foreign
mining companies to invest in the mining sector, the government promulgated the Law on Minerals
Management and Mining in 2001. The Ministry of Industry, Mines and Energy (MIME, now known as
the Ministry of Mines and Energy - MME) is the main government agency that implements the country's
mineral law and policy. The MME's Department of Geology and Mines and the Department of Energy are
responsible for developing the country's mineral resources, providing mining assistance to the private
sector, and administering mining-related regulations and inspections. In the past, various reports indicated
that without strong and comprehensive mining regulations and standards, many mining operations were
destroying natural ecosystems with severe impacts to downstream watercourses and the surrounding
communities from water pollution that affected the overall aquatic biodiversity; this was in turn having
detrimental effects on economic livelihoods and social harmony.

The 2002 NBSAP contains three strategic objectives and three priority actions relating to the exploration,
extraction and processing of mineral resources. The negative impact of mining activities on biodiversity,
including the destruction and pollution of habitats, partly due to a lack of adequate and environmentally
friendly methods, was found as one of the main issues together with the absence of appropriate
monitoring programmes.

With the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, some mining methods have been improved. The cost/benefit
analysis and EIA have continued to be applied systematically, although mining activities, particularly
small scale mining, still pollute and degrade natural ecosystems. Implementation of actions relating to
mining in the 2002 NBSAP was supported by a number of policies and strategies including the 2001 Law
on Management and Exploitation of Mineral Resources.

The Cambodian Development Council (CDC) is the government agency that grants exploration licenses
to investors. If exploration is successful, investors are required to present a master project plan to the
CDC before being granted a mining license. The amount of investment approved for mining projects by
the CDC totaled $181 million in 200515.

In the Rio+20 Conference report, "The Future we want", the world community recognizes that "mining
offers the opportunity to catalyse broad-based economic development, reduce poverty and assist countries
in meeting internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals,
when managed effectively and properly". However "governments need strong capacities to develop,
manage and regulate their mining industries, in the interest of sustainable development."

2. Issues

The same issues identified in 2002 are still valid today, but mainly regarding illegal mining activities:

         (a) Destruction and pollution of natural habitats by mining activities, particularly illegal mining
               activities;

         (b) Lack of consideration of biodiversity protection in illegal mining activities;

         (c) Lack of adequate mining methods in illegal activities;

         (d) Absence of well-defined monitoring program from illegal mining.

In addition, enforcement of the 2001 Law of Minerals Management and Mining of Cambodia has not
been very effective, partly due to lack of transparency:

         (a) A number of mining companies carry out mining activities with licenses given only for
               exploration activities;

         (b) An escalating number of licenses for mineral resources are being allocated to private sector
               investors in the absence of an adequate legal framework or environmental and social
               safeguards;

         (c) Exploration or mining licenses have been granted on indigenous land without consulting

                                                                37
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

               with local communities and ethnic minority groups;

         (d) Mining licenses have been allocated inside protected areas, protected forests and
               ecologically sensitive areas, while Chapter 8 of the 2008 Protected Area Law restricts the use
               of natural resources in the core and conservation zones;

         (e) The high cost of restoring or rehabilitating environments that are degraded by mining is used
               as an excuse not to restore degraded ecosystems.

Mining can, to some extent, exemplify the issues of unsustainable production and consumption when
ecosystems are destroyed, pollutants and various wastes are dumped into water streams, and energy and
water resources are overused. The world community recognized, on the occasion of the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development in 1992, that the major cause of the continued
deterioration of the global environment was the unsustainable pattern of consumption and production.
The challenge for all countries was then to decouple economic growth from the rising rates of natural
resource use and the environmental impacts that occur in consumption and production life cycles and due
to waste generation. At the World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD) in 2002, it was
acknowledged that sustainable consumption and production form one of the three overarching objectives
of, and essential requirements for, sustainable development, together with poverty eradication and the
management of natural resources in order to foster economic and social development. A voluntary 10-
Year Framework of Programmes on Sustainable Consumption and Production Patterns was adopted at the
Rio+20 Conference.

Sustainable consumption and production is about "the use of services and related products, which respond
to basic needs and bring a better quality of life while minimizing the use of natural resources and toxic
materials as well as the emissions of waste and pollutants over the life cycle of the service or product so
as not to jeopardize the needs of further generations"16. Sustainable consumption and production offers
important contributions for the transition towards low-carbon and green economies/green growth. It
requires building cooperation among different stakeholders, as well as across sectors in the countries.

The challenges posed by production and consumption are mounting as Cambodias demand for
natural/biological resources is increasing with population growth and demand, and with economic growth
and the need for export products. The economic sectors causing the most significant environmental
pressures in Cambodia are: agriculture, forestry, energy, water supply, mining, construction, food
production, tourism, transport services and waste disposal. Environmental impacts of production and
consumption can be reduced by using the 3-R strategy consisting of reducing resource use and waste
generations, re-using resources, and recycling wastes. The strategy can be implemented through specific
controls at the sites of production, use and disposal, by adopting green technologies or by transferring
demand from higher to lower impact consumption categories. Policy options can include improved
environmental information, certification, labeling, verification, green public procurement and
market-based instruments.

The issue of sustainable production and consumption is relevant to a number of other NBSAP themes,
such as agriculture and animal production (Theme 13), aquaculture (Theme 10), energy resource (Theme
14), manufacturing industry (Theme 17), quality of life and poverty reduction (Theme 22), landscape and
seascape management and coordination (Theme 23) and, with more emphasis on the consumption and use
aspects, to Themes 7 (Waters resources), 9 (Sustainable forest resources), 10 (Freshwater fisheries), 11
(Coastal and marine resources), 12 (Animal wildlife resources), 16 (Customary sustainable use and
traditional knowledge), and 17 (Tourism). The clearing­house mechanism (Theme 24) will contain
information and data on the importance of awareness-raising, education and communication (Theme 20)
for production and consumption.

Specific issues relating to sustainable production and consumption in Cambodia17 include:

         (a) Lack of specific laws and regulations addressing the Sustainable Consumption and
               Production concept especially including Cleaner Production;

         (b) No significant investment on, and lack of appropriate financing mechanisms for the
               recycling of solid wastes, ,,Cleaner Production or, in general, ,,Sustainable Consumption and
               Production;

                                                                38
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

         (c) Weak recognition of ,,Cleaner Production and ,,Sustainable Consumption and Production in
               most industrial development policies;

         (d) Weak institutional and technological capacity.
However, opportunities for ,,Sustainable Consumption and Production in the country include the facts
that the Green Growth Roadmap promotes ,,Sustainable Consumption and Production activities.
Furthermore, the 3-R Concept is being promoted through environmental education programmes, and a
number of existing laws provide some framework for application of Sustainable Consumption and
Production principles.
3. Strategic objectives
The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues

         (a) Strategic objective 1: Assess the impact of mining on biodiversity components and
               functions, and enhance awareness about this impact and its implications for sustainable
               development and poverty reduction in Cambodia;

         (b) Strategic objective 2: Develop and apply, as appropriate, preventive and corrective
               measures;

         (c) Strategic objective 3: Strengthen measures that will enhance the contribution of mining
               resources to biodiversity conservation, poverty reduction, sustainable development and the
               well-being of all in Cambodia;

         (d) Strategic objective 4: Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation of the
               actions identified for biodiversity-friendly mining activities.

Good planning (Theme 6) taking into account the existing laws (Theme 21), supported by the application
of biodiversity-inclusive SEA and EIA, adequate landscape management measures and coordination
(Theme 23), adequate management of water resources (Theme 7), and using the participatory approach
involving well informed (Theme 20) local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities (Theme 19) and
representatives of relevant stakeholder groups will ensure that mining activities are carried out in line
with the objectives of this NBSAP.
Ensuring that mining activities are in line with the conservation of biodiversity (Group 1 themes in this
NBSAP) and the sustainable use of its components (in particular the resources considered in Group 2
themes), will have a positive contribution particularly for the strategic objectives under Theme 1 on
Protected Areas System, Theme 10 on Freshwater Fisheries and Aquaculture, Theme 11 on Coastal and
Marine Resources and Theme 12 on Forest Resources. The implementation of the actions listed in Table 8
below will therefore contribute specifically to the achievement of Cambodia Biodiversity Target 7, and
also to many others including Targets 1 to 6, 10 to 12, 15 and 16. These actions will also contribute to the
achievement of the NSDS 2030 vision that Cambodia should, by 2030, have "abundant mineral resources
and a sustainable mining sector that is exploiting minerals without destruction of nearby human
settlements and landscapes, and without causing serious health and environmental impacts; and which
economizes the scarce mineral resources and promotes recycling of metals".

                                                                39
                                                                         National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Table 8: Key actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their implementation under the theme on "Sustainable Mining"

Strategic Objectives                                        Key Actions                                                                                   Coordinating
                                                                                                                                                        and participating

                                                                                                                                                          ministries and
                                                                                                                                                             agencies

Strategic objective 1:                                  1.1 Assess the ecological and socioeconomic impact of mineral resource exploration,             MME, MOE,
                                                              extraction and processing on the status and trends of biodiversity (natural habitats and  MAFF, GSSD
Assess the impact of mining on biodiversity                   wildlife in particular) and its functioning. Describe in particular the destruction and
components and functions, and enhance awareness               pollution of natural habitats by mining activities.
about this impact and its implications for sustainable
development and poverty reduction in Cambodia.          1.2 Assess the role of biodiversity in mining (e.g. water hyacinth in water purification).      MME, MOE,
                                                                                                                                                        MAFF, GSSD

Strategic objective 2:                                  2.1 Integrate biodiversity protection considerations in mining activities essentially           MME, MOE,
                                                              through the application of (i) the Voluntary Guidelines on Biodiversity-Inclusive         MAFF, GSSD
Develop and apply, as appropriate, preventive and             Impact Assessment (CBD Decision VIII/28 also adopted by the Ramsar Convention)
corrective measures                                           and (ii) the Akwé: Kon Voluntary guidelines for the conduct of cultural,
                                                              environmental and social impact assessments regarding developments proposed to
                                                              take place on, or which are likely to impact on, sacred sites and on lands and waters
                                                              traditionally occupied or used by indigenous and local communities (Annex to CBD
                                                              decision VI/7 A).

                                                        2.2 Study the feasibility, costs and benefits of correcting existing mining industries for      MME and MOE
                                                              environmental soundness                                                                   MAFF, GSSD

                                                        2.3 Investigate whether environmental and social impact assessments were made in                MME and MOE
                                                              existing mines and whether the results were taken into account to halt detrimental        MAFF, GSSD
                                                              activities or compensate for negative impacts on biodiversity/environment;
                                                                                                                                                        MME, MAFF,
                                                        2.4 Explore and promote alternatives to mining in terms of land and resource use, based         MOE, GSSD
                                                              on the result of land-use planning and sustainable financing options. These options
                                                              could include ecotourism, carbon storage credits under the REDD+ framework, and           MME, GSSD
                                                              endowments                                                                                MOE, MAFF

                                                        2.5 Assess the impact on biodiversity of (authorized or unauthorized) mining within
                                                              protected areas and conservation areas

                                                        40
                                                                                                        National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                                    2.6 Explore biodiversity for mining when preventative and corrective measures are           MME, GSSD
                                                          insufficient                                                                          MAFF, MOE

                                                    2.7 Reclaim and rehabilitate degraded mining sites                                          MME, GSSD
                                                                                                                                                MOE, MAFF

Strategic objective 3:                              3.1 Make benefits from mining activities a resource for the conservation and sustainable MME, GSSD
                                                                                                                                                MOE, MAFF
Strengthen measures that will enhance the               use of biodiversity.
contribution of mining resources to biodiversity
conservation, poverty reduction, sustainable        4.1 Strengthen the human, technical and technological capacities for the effective          MME, MAFF,
development and the well-being of all in Cambodia.       achievement of the objectives and implementation of the actions listed under this      MOE, GSSD
                                                         theme. Capacity-building programmes will target all the sectors that are relevant to
Strategic objective 4:                                   mining and the conservation of biodiversity and will be done essentially through       MME, MAFF,
                                                         communication, education, research and public awareness.                               MOE, GSSD
Strengthen the enabling environment for the
implementation of the actions identified for        4.2 Facilitate and encourage the acquisition and adaptation of low carbon and clean         MME, MOE,
biodiversity-friendly mining activities.                 technology for mining activities, the 3R Concept (reduce, recycle, re-use), land and   GSSD, MOH
                                                         water restoration and impact assessment.                                               MAFF

                                                    4.3 Develop Guidelines on Biodiversity-Inclusive Environmental Impact Assessment for        MME, MOE,
                                                         Cambodia building on the EIA guidelines adopted under the CBD and the Ramsar           GSSD
                                                         Convention, taking into account human health.
                                                                                                                                                MME, MAFF,
                                                    4.4 Enforce the mining law, review the code for mining and propose, as appropriate,         MOE, GSSD
                                                         additions to fully take into account biodiversity issues.

                                                    4.5 Put in place programmes and resources for assessing the contribution of mining
                                                         resources to the countrys economy and the well-being of the people, and for
                                                         monitoring and evaluating the impact of mining activities on biodiversity and its
                                                         ecosystem services, and the impact of measures taken to protect biodiversity from the
                                                         negative impacts of mining activities.

                                                    41
    National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

4.6 Strengthen coordination among ministries, bearing in mind that most of the actions          MME, MAFF,
     listed above are inherently multi-disciplinary and multisectoral, and that their           MOE, GSSD,
     effectiveness requires coordination across the government, also between governmental       MOI, MME,
     and non-governmental organizations. Recognizing this, the government formalized the        MRD, MPWT,
     cross-ministerial coordination involved, e.g. in the EIA process with, (i) management      MOT, MOH
     level representation of various ministries in the Environment Steering Committee,
     which also includes NGOs and the Chamber of Commerce, and (ii) formation of
     environmental units within other ministries having resource-management functions, to
     coordinate with the Ministry of Environment, including the Ministry of Industry
     (MOI), the Ministry of Mine and Energy (MME). A number of agencies of Ministries
     such as MAFF, the Ministry of Public Works and Transport (MPWT), Ministry of
     Rural Development (MRD), Ministry of Tourism (MOT), and the Ministry of Health
     (MOH) participate in many phases of the EIA process.

4.7 Mobilize financial resources for studies, assessments and other activities described        MME, MAFF,
     under this theme, using a diversified source of financial resources including the profits  MOE and GSSD
     from mining resources.

42
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                     Theme 5: Environmental Security

1. Background

At the time of the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, the main issues relating to environmental security were
(i) the presence of land mines that were responsible for the daily deaths or maiming of several persons;
making it impossible to establish legal conservation programmes in those insecure zones, and (ii) natural
disasters, more specifically floods that caused severe human suffering and deaths, serious damage to
infrastructure, major disruption of social and economic activities, and loss of agricultural land and crops.
In addition, although a National Committee for Disaster Management was established in 1999, awareness
of disaster prevention measures and the role of biodiversity in these measures was limited.

In order to prevent and/or reduce the negative impacts of catastrophic events on biodiversity resources
and improve security in areas of high biological importance, two strategic objectives were adopted in the
2002 NBSAP with the following priority actions: (i) strengthen flood prevention awareness programs and
rehabilitation plans by integrating biodiversity protection measures, (ii) develop a strategy for minimizing
pollution of water bodies and creating environmental security for integrated biodiversity water resources,
and (iii) prevent and/or reduce damage from flood, drought, watershed degradation, erosion and
sedimentation and thus protect fish and other aquatic resources.

In terms of the implementation of the adopted objectives and actions, Cambodia enacted the National
Biosafety Law (2004) under MOE, and the Law on Water Resources Management of the Kingdom of
Cambodia (2007) under MOWRAM.

Moreover, the Ministry of Rural Development (MRD) adopted in 2010 the Rural Water Supply,
Sanitation and Hygiene Strategy 2010-2025 and is implementing it in collaboration with UNICEF to
address, among other points, flood responses and water supply and quality. MRD, MOWRAM and
CNMC are also collaborating on an integrated management of transboundary water resources. These
activities are ongoing and require additional funding to proceed effectively.

Cambodia18 made remarkable progress in reducing casualties from landmines and explosive remnants of
war. The annual number of civilian casualties recorded fell from 4,320 casualties in 1996 to 243 in 2009.
Due to the magnitude of the task, Cambodia was granted an extension of the period for landmine
clearance from 2010 to 2019. Clearance methods are becoming safer and more efficient, with a 2%
annual increase, it is expected that another 47,000 ha can be cleared by 2019.

2. Issues

The following key issues were identified during the implementation of the objectives and priority actions
under this theme:

         (a) Development and management (i.e. conservation and sustainable use) of natural resources
               are impaired by natural disasters and other security problems;

         (b) Negative impacts of floods on biodiversity resources;

         (c) Lack of awareness of disaster prevention measures and the role of biodiversity;

         (d) Limited capacities at the community and national levels to manage and reduce risk.

3. Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues

         (a) Strategic objective 1: Gather relevant information and data on disasters and other
               environmental security problems, on disaster risks and vulnerabilities, as well as on
               capacities for addressing disasters and disaster risks;

         (b) Strategic objective 2: Identify ways and means to address environmental security through
               preventive, proactive and corrective measures;

         (c) Strategic objective 3: Strengthen the enabling environment for the effective implementation
               of measures addressing environmental security.

The strategic objectives and associated actions under the themes on protected areas (Theme 1) and
threatened species (Theme 2) are also relevant here. Successful implementation of the actions identified
in Table 9 will facilitate the implementation of actions under many other themes of Group 1 (conservation

                                                                43
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

of the different components of biodiversity) and 2 (sustainable use of biological resources and ecosystems
as well as the services they provide). In the same perspective, implementation of these actions will
contribute to the implementation of various targets based on biological resources and ecosystem
management such as Cambodia Biodiversity Targets 5, 6, 8, 10 to 12, 15 and 20.

                                                                44
                                                                          National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Table 9: Key actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their implementation under the theme on "Environmental Security"

Strategic Objectives                                         Key Actions                                                                 Coordinating and
                                                                                                                                   participating ministries and

                                                                                                                                               agencies

Strategic objective 1:                                   1.1 Identify, assess and monitor disaster risks and the physical,         NCDM, MOE, GSSD
                                                               social, economic and environmental vulnerabilities of societies     MOWRAM, MAFF, MRD,
Gather relevant information and data on disasters              to disasters.                                                       MLMUPC, MME
and other environmental security problems, on
disaster risks and vulnerabilities, as well as on        1.2 Record, analyse, summarize, map and disseminate, on a regular         NCDM, MOE, GSSD
capacities for addressing disasters and disaster risks.        basis, statistical information on disaster occurrence, impacts and  MOWRAM, MAFF, MRD,
                                                               losses, through international, regional, national and local         MLMUPC, MME, MOSVY
                                                               mechanisms

                                                         1.3 Establish an environmental and natural resource database and          NCDM, MOE, GSSD
                                                               promote exchange and dissemination of data for disaster risk        MOWRAM, MAFF, MRD,
                                                               assessment, monitoring and early warning purposes                   MLMUPC, MME

                                                         1.4 Assess existing human resource capacities for disaster risk           NCDM, MOE, GSSD
                                                               evaluation and reduction at all levels                              MOWRAM, MAFF, MRD,
                                                                                                                                   MLMUPC, MME)

                                                         1.5 Compile and standardize, as appropriate, statistical information      NCDM, MOE, GSSD
                                                               and data on regional disaster risks, impacts and losses.            MOWRAM, MAFF, MRD,
                                                                                                                                   MLMUPC, MME

                                                         1.6 Conduct risk assessment and risk management of living                 GSSD, MOE, MAFF
                                                               modified organisms and ensure adverse risk to biodiversity and
                                                               human health is minimized

Strategic objective 2:                                   2.1 Develop early warning systems that are timely and                     NCDM, MOE, GSSD
                                                              understandable to those at risk, and guidance on how to act upon     MOWRAM, MAFF, MRD,
Identify ways and means to address environmental              those warnings;                                                      MLMUPC, MME
security through preventive, proactive and corrective
measures

                                                         45
                                                           National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                                       2.2 Introduce a preventive strategy into all sectors of the society         NCDM, MOE, GSSD
                                                            (including, among others, production, consumption, education,          MOWRAM, MAFF, MRD,
                                                            research and development, public construction works,                   MLMUPC, MME
                                                            communication, and waste management) to avoid pollution
                                                            occurrences and minimize pollution impacts of water bodies.

                                                       2.3 Prevent the damage that may occur as a result of flooding,              MOWRAM, MME, MOE
                                                            drought, watershed degradation, erosion and sedimentation to           MAFF, GSSD
                                                            protect fish resources and other aquatic biodiversity. These
                                                            measures can include the construction or rehabilitation of bank
                                                            protection works, dikes, and the provision of water storage
                                                            facilities; the prohibition of sand mining on the bed and banks of
                                                            water bodies or of the obstruction of flow/drainage, with the
                                                            participation of communities.

                                                       2.4 Integrate biodiversity protection measures in flood prevention          NCDM, MOE, GSSD
                                                            awareness programs and rehabilitation plans (including tree            MOWRAM, MAFF, MRD,
                                                            planting on riverbanks and foothills, preventing deforestation, etc.)  MLMUPC, MME, MOSVY

                                                       2.5 Take proactive measures that will build community resilience and        NCDM, MOE, GSSD
                                                            reduce vulnerability to future disaster risks. More specifically,      MOWRAM, MAFF, MRD,
                                                            create environmental security for integrated biodiversity water        MLMUPC and MME
                                                            resources management and development through the formulation
                                                            and adoption of a coherent policy for the water sector as a whole,
                                                            for water resource use and development planning, economic
                                                            instrument for water resource management, establishment of
                                                            protected areas, control of floods, watershed, management, penalties

                                                       2.6 Take corrective measures, bearing in mind that the phases of            NCDM, MOE, GSSD
                                                            relief, rehabilitation and reconstruction following a disaster are     MOWRAM, MAFF, MRD,
                                                            windows of opportunity for the rebuilding of livelihoods and for       MLMUPC, MME
                                                            the planning and reconstruction of physical and socio-economic
                                                            structures.

Strategic objective 3:                                 3.1 Revise and update policies so as to integrate environmental             NCDM, MOE, GSSD
                                                            security in the framework of sustainable development and poverty       MOWRAM, MAFF, MRD,
Strengthen the enabling environment for the effective       reduction, with a special emphasis on disaster preparedness,           MLMUPC, MME, MOP,
implementation of measures addressing                       prevention and mitigation, as well as vulnerability reduction          MOSVY
environmental security

                                                       46
                                                                   National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

3.2 Ensure community participation in disaster risk reduction through     NCDM, MOE, GSSD
     the adoption of specific policies, the attribution of roles and      MOWRAM, MAFF, MRD,
     responsibilities, and the delegation and provision of the necessary  MLMUPC, MME, MOSVY
     authority and resources

3.3 Develop or strengthen the infrastructure and scientific, technical,   NCDM, MOE, GSSD
     technological and institutional capacities needed for carrying out   MOWRAM, MAFF, MRD,
     research, observations, analysis, mapping and, where possible,       MLMUPC, MME
     forecasting natural and related hazards, risks from LMOs,
     vulnerabilities and disaster impacts;

3.4 Develop or strengthen institutions, mechanisms and capacities that NCDM, MOE, GSSD

    can contribute to building resilience to hazards, in particular at the MOWRAM, MAFF, MRD,

    community level;                                                      MLMUPC, MME, MOP

3.5 Assess existing human resource capacities for disaster risk           NCDM, MOE, GSSD
     reduction at all levels and develop and implement capacity-          MOWRAM, MAFF, MRD,
     building plans and programmes for meeting on-going and future        MLMUPC, MME, MOSVY
     requirements;

3.6 Enhance cooperation within the country, the region and                NCDM, MOE, GSSD
     internationally in the field of disaster risk assessment and         MOWRAM, MAFF, MRD,
     reduction.                                                           MLMUPC , MME

3.7 Allocate resources for the development and effective                  NCDM, MOE, GSSD
     implementation of disaster risk management legislation, policies     MOWRAM, MAFF, MRD,
     and programmes.                                                      MLMUPC, MME, MOP

3.8 Build a culture of safety, prevention and resilience, through         MOEYS, NCDM, GSSD,
     communication, education and public awareness programmes, and        MOE, MAFF
     through the mobilization of adequate resources for disaster risk
     reduction

47
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                Theme 6: Sustainable Land-Use Planning

1. Background

Recognizing the importance of planning in decisions that can have significant and sometimes irreversible
impacts on land, the 2002 NBSAP focused on ensuring the integration of conservation and sustainable
use of biodiversity and its components into land-use planning. The two strategic objectives adopted with
the associated three priority actions dealt with the strengthening of institutional capacity in land-use
planning, and the development of national and provincial land-use master plans, together with the
development of community-based land-use planning manuals and plans.

Significant progress has been made in achieving the strategic objectives:

           (a) The Ministry of Land Management Urban Plan and Construction (MLMUPC), with
                 financial support from the Government of the Republic of Korea, carried out training about
                 participatory land-use planning;

           (b) MLMUPC also produced, in a participatory manner, the National Base Map, Map Symbol
                 Standards, and Master Plan for the National Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI) in
                 Cambodia;

           (c) The Inter-ministerial committee established to coordinate the preparation and
                 implementation of development projects along the western and northern parts of the
                 country set standards for agricultural land and residential land;

           (d) Sub-decrees were signed in 2009 on the procedures for commune land-use planning, on
                 procedures for registering land of indigenous communities, and on registration and right to
                 use lands of indigenous communities;

           (e) An approach to land classification and mapping was discussed with the support of the Land
                 Management and Administration Project (LMAP).

Implementation of the objectives adopted in the 2002 NBSAP were also supported by laws such as the
Land Law, the 2008 Law on Protected Areas, the Law on Forestry, and the Law on Fisheries; by the Sub
Decrees on Social Land Concession, on Community Forestry Management, on Sporadic Land
Registration, on the Procedures to establish Cadastral Index Map and Land Register, on State Land
Management; and by the Strategy of Land Policy Framework.

Although land-use master plans were adopted, there is still a need for financial resources for their
implementation.

2. Issues

The following key issues were identified:

           (a) Development projects are still taking place at the expense of cultivable land and natural
                 habitats, especially wetlands;

           (b) A policy framework and accurate information to guide land-use allocation is still lacking,
                 as well as effective land-use planning capacity;

           (c) Roles and responsibilities of institutions need to be clarified;

           (d) An official and standardized land and biome classification system is still lacking;

           (e) There are still no agreed national guidelines for land-use planning, no experience in Macro
                 Land-use planning, and no public funds invested yet in land-use planning activities;

           (f) Land tenure is still a problem for many, especially rural farmers. Providing titles and
                 security of land tenure will encourage local communities to adopt sustainable agricultural
                 systems and increase agricultural production;

           (g) Large tracts of arable land are still covered with dangerous land mines.

3. Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues:

                                                                48
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

           (a) Strategic objective 1: Inventory land-use planning activities, assess their effectiveness and
                 identify areas where land-use planning is needed to ensure the conservation of biodiversity,
                 the sustainable use of its components, and the contribution to sustainable development and
                 poverty eradication;

           (b) Strategic objective 2: Integrate land-use planning in sustainable development and poverty
                 reduction strategies, plans and programmes;

           (c) Strategic objective 3: Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation of the
                 land-use planning.

Strategic objectives and actions listed under this Land-Use Planning theme are important in the initial
steps in implementing actions under Groups 1 (Protection of Biodiversity) and 2 (Sustainable use of
Biodiversity) themes. Actions under such themes as ,,Resource Mobilization (Theme 18), Community
Participation (Theme 19), Legislation and Institutional Structure (Theme 21), Landscape and Seascape
Management and Coordination (Theme 23), and CHM (Theme 24) will support the implementation of the
actions listed in Table 10 below for land-use planning.

                                                                49
                                                                                                National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Table 10: Key actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their implementation under the theme on "Sustainable Land-Use
             Planning"

                      Strategic Objectives                Key Actions                                                                       Coordinating and
                                                                                                                                               participating
Strategic objective 1:                                                                                                                        ministries and
Inventory land-use planning activities, assess their                                                                                              agencies
effectiveness and identify areas where land-use
planning is needed to ensure the conservation of      1.1 Assess the effectiveness of completed, on-going and planned land-use-             MPLUP, MRD,
biodiversity, the sustainable use of its components,        planning activities at the national, provincial and district levels, at the     MOE, MAFF,
and the contribution to sustainable development and         commune or village or landscape levels, and at the farm or field levels, and    MME MOP
poverty eradication.                                        gather information about conflicts, ecosystem degradation or loss of
                                                            biodiversity and its ecosystem services caused by lack of land-use planning.

                                                      1.2 Assess the needs for land-use planning particularly in areas with high or         MPLUP, MRD,
                                                            conflicting development potentials, such as peri-urban areas, large irrigation  MOE, MAFF,
                                                            schemes and hydropower dams. In the case of dams, in particular, assess the     MME MOP,
                                                            impacts of existing and planned dams on biodiversity and ecosystem              GSSD
                                                            services, and identify locations and designs that will minimize those impacts.

                                                      1.3 Assess existing and needed human, financial, technological and institutional      MPLUP, MRD,
                                                            capacities for land-use planning.                                               MOE, MAFF,
                                                                                                                                            MME

                                                      1.4 Review locations and biodiversity value of national Important Bird Areas MOE, MAFF,
                                                            (IBA) and Key Biodiversity Areas (KBA); and ensure that the network of MPLUP
                                                            IBA/KBAs are taken into account in land-use planning decisions and that
                                                            any impacts of land-use change upon IBA/KBAs are assessed through robust
                                                            biodiversity-inclusive Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA).

Strategic objective 2:                                2.1 Develop guidelines for land-use planning, building on the ecosystem               MPLUP, MRD,

Integrate land-use planning in sustainable                approach and experiences at the national, regional and global levels, so as to MOE, MAFF,
development and poverty reduction strategies, plans
and programmes.                                           optimize the use of the resources found in the country and their social,          MME

                                                          environmental and economic benefits.

                                                      50
                                                                                         National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                             2.2 Develop a national land-use master plan and provincial land-use plans            MLMUPC, MRD,
                                                 integrating environmental, social and economic concerns, and using a             MOP, MOE,
                                                 participatory approach.                                                          MAFF

                                             2.3 Develop community-based land-use plans                                           MOE, GSSD

                                             2.4 Include land-use planning in ecosystem restoration activities.                   MLMUPC, MRD,
                                                                                                                                  MOP, MOE,
                                                                                                                                  MAFF, MOP

Strategic objective 3:                       3.1 Integrate land-use planning in all planning processes dealing with biological    MPLUP, MRD,
                                                  resources and take into account present and future needs and pressures          MOE, MAFF,
Strengthen the enabling environment for the                                                                                       MME
implementation of land-use planning

                                             3.2 Develop human and institutional capacity on land-use planning, including         MLMUPC, MRD
                                                  manuals on participatory land-use planning.                                     and MAFF

                                             3.3 Compile information and collect data needed in land-use planning, and            MPLUP, MOE,

                                                 disseminate through the clearing-house mechanism and other relevant means MAFF

                                             3.4 Strengthen cooperation and coordination regarding land-use planning              MPLUP, MRD,
                                                  between MLMUPC and the departments and offices in charge of natural             MOE, MAFF,
                                                  resources, such as GDANCP in MOE or the Offices of Fisheries under the          MME
                                                  Department of Agriculture and Fisheries in MAFF.

                                             3.5 Have policies in place to safeguard land against inappropriate use, especially   MPLUP, MRD,
                                                  where land has particular value in delivering benefits of key strategic         MOE, MAFF,
                                                  importance.                                                                     MME

                                             3.6 Mobilize the necessary financial resources to carry out activities for land-use  MPLUP, MRD,
                                                  planning.                                                                       MOE, MAFF,
                                                                                                                                  MME

                                             51
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                 Theme 7: Sustainable Water Resources

1. Background

Cambodia is a "water-wealthy" country, with an annual water availability of nearly 50,000m3 per person.
Water resources are an essential component of the nations environment and natural resource base.
Cambodia possesses a vast array of water resources, with the Mekong River and the Tonle Sap lake
system being the most important ones. Both constitute the basis for the countrys fisheries, irrigated
agricultural production, domestic and industrial water supply, hydroelectric potential and navigation. A
long dry season and pollution from various sources limit the amount and quality of water available for
aquatic life, human consumption, agriculture and other uses. Construction and improvement of irrigation
facilities and establishment of flood protection structures have always been a priority.

The creation of the Ministry of Water Resources and Meteorology (MOWRAM) in 1999 centralized
jurisdiction over water resources policy and management. The ministry is responsible for management of
fresh and marine water resources, including defining water resources policy and development strategies to
support sustainable use, development, and national and international conservation and protection.

The main goal of the 2002 NBSAP under this theme was then to "ensure that the water environment is
unpolluted and supports healthy fisheries and aquatic ecosystems". Thus five strategic objectives were
adopted to ensure the application of environmental impact assessment to projects touching water
resources, to ensure enough amounts of water and water flow for fisheries and fish migration, and to
prevent water pollution from all sources by protecting river banks, lake shores and riparian areas. Despite
the Mekong River Sustainable Development Agreement (1995), hydro dams were a hot issue for
countries in the region, including Cambodia, where the EIA capacity was still weak.

A number of programmes were then identified in the 2002 NBSAP with a view of achieving the strategic
objectives. They include programmes for (i) the management of water resources, (ii) public water to
improve water quality for humans, livestock and aquatic biodiversity, (iii) groundwater monitoring, (iv)
water pollution prevention for the industry and agriculture sectors, (iv) urban waste water treatment; and
(v) ensuring the financial sustainability of hydraulic infrastructure program.

Apart from the programme on financial sustainability of hydraulic infrastructure, which has yet to be
started, all the other programmes are underway and some require financial support to proceed effectively.
Also MOWRAM has rehabilitated irrigation for agriculture at many sites.

It is important to note some of the relevant laws, policies and strategies adopted since 2002:

         (a) The 2003 National Water Supply and Sanitation Policy contains explicit provisions
               regarding sanitation and hygiene improvement and advocates for a dramatic increase in rural
               sanitation coverage between 2015 and 2025, from the 30% targeted in the original 2015
               CMDG to 100% rural sanitation coverage 10 years later. This will require investment,
               focused attention, and new and innovative approaches;

         (b) The 2007 Law on Water Resources Management of the Kingdom of Cambodia, which
               defines the rights and obligations of water users, states the fundamental principles of water
               resource management and identifies the institutions with the authority to implement and
               enforce the law and regulate the participation of users in the sustainable development of
               water resources. The principle of Integrated Water Resource Management requires
               coordinated multi-sectoral water use planning including the need for conservation of
               biodiversity and ecosystems. However, there is still a long way to go with regards to the
               implementation of the concept;

         (c) The 2010 Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Strategy 2010-2025 defines the water
               supply, sanitation and hygiene services to be made available to people living in rural areas,
               as well as the institutional arrangements and financial, human and other resources necessary
               to sustainably provide these services. The underlying purpose is to accelerate progress
               toward the achievement of the Cambodian Millennium Development Goals (CMDGs) in
               2015 and the Sector Vision in 2025; and

         (d) The SubDecrees on Water Pollution Control (1999)19, and on Solid Waste Management
               (1999)20.

                                                                52
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

2. Issues
The following key issues are still impacting water resources in Cambodia:

         (a) Pollution caused by agricultural, industrial and domestic activities;
         (b) Negative impacts of dams, building of harbors, navigation channels, irrigation, river

               canalization and diversions on fish and agriculture productivity. As noted in the National
               Sustainable Development Strategy (2009), dam constructions can cause serious impacts on
               the hydrological regime of the countrys water resources resulting in serious effects on
               human settlements and natural resources such as in the Tonle Sap ecosystem;
         (c) Deterioration of banks and riparian zones;
         (d) Lack of effective law enforcement;
         (e) The governments limited capacity to control inappropriate settlements and use of flood
               management embankments;
         (f) Lack of effective and popular mechanisms and means of communication and information
               dissemination;
         (g) Limited financial resources at the national and sub-national levels, in particular for
               implementing the National Policy on Water Resources Management and for getting the
               participation of farmers in the operation and maintenance of irrigation facilities;
         (h) Some water resources are shared in the region;
         (i) The numerous natural disasters (floods and droughts) during the past years;
         (j) Limited information, due to insufficient monitoring and observation stations, for rainfall
               forecasts, drought and flood warnings, as well as information on flood hydrology, river
               geomorphology, bank erosion locations and floodplain sediments.
3. Strategic objectives
         The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues.
         (a) Strategic objective 1: Maintain water resources quality and quantity suitable for human
               consumption, and use in agriculture, livestock and industries;
         (b) Strategic objective 2: Reduce the effects of flooding and droughts on water supply and
               quality.
Availability of good quality water in sufficient quantity is critical for the effective management of
biological resources and ecosystems/landscapes. A successful implementation of these objectives through
the actions listed in Table 11 will contribute to the implementation of the objectives under Group 2
themes: to Theme 22 on health, quality of life and poverty reduction; Theme 17 on the functioning of
industries; and to the NSDS vision 2030 that Cambodia should have a sustainable supply of water for key
sectors such as fisheries, water supply, irrigation, hydropower, transportation, tourism, recreation,
wastewater treatment and good ecosystem functions, and plan for a sustainable use of water resources
based on integrated water resource management that ensures a proper quantity and quality of water.

                                                                53
                                                                                                            National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Table 11: Key actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their implementation under the theme on "Sustainable Water
             Resources"

                     Strategic Objective           Key Actions                                                                               Coordinating and
                                                                                                                                          participating ministries
Strategic objective 1:
Maintain water resources quality and quantity                                                                                                    and agencies
suitable for human consumption, and use in
agriculture, livestock and industries          1.1. Develop and implement water resources allocation and management programs for          MOWRAM
                                                    fisheries, human consumption, irrigation in agro-ecosystem, hydropower,               MOE, GSSD, MAFF
                                                    transportation, tourism, recreation, wastewater treatment and good ecosystem
                                                    functions

                                               1.2. Promote small water investments in the local community                                MME, GSSD, MAFF,
                                                                                                                                          MOE, MRD
                                                                                                                                          MOWRAM,

                                               1.3. Develop and implement a public water program to improve water quality, so as to       MOWRAM, MOE,
                                                    be able to satisfy present and future demands and ensure that water bodies have       GSSD, MAFF, MME
                                                    the capacity to sustain aquatic biodiversity and fish life, and to protect human and
                                                    animal health.

                                               1.4. Ensure the financial sustainability of the hydraulic infrastructure program by        MOWRAM, MAFF,
                                                    including the introduction of the concept of water use fees, and arrangement for      MOE, MME, GSSD
                                                    the participation of the users in the maintenance and management of rehabilitated
                                                    and newly constructed irrigation schemes for improving the agriculture sector.

                                               1.5. Develop and implement a groundwater monitoring program to track groundwater           MOWRAM, MRD,
                                                    quality, groundwater pumping for groundwater discharge, groundwater level,            MOE, MAFF, MOH,
                                                    groundwater current, and for modelling and mapping.                                   GSSD

                                               1.6. Develop and implement a water pollution prevention program for the industry           MOE, GSSD
                                                    sector, and include regulations for storm water disposal and wastewater               MOWRAM, MME
                                                    management, licensing of wastewater abstractions and discharges, and technology
                                                    development transfer.

                                               1.7. Prevent pollution of water for agriculture sector, making sure to include lakeshore   MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                    and riverbanks protection and reforestation, guidelines for the application of agro-  MOWRAM
                                                    chemicals, community education programs for economical, and low-impact use of

                                               54
                                                    National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Strategic objective 2:                               agro-chemicals.                                                                  MOE, GSSD,
                                                                                                                                      MOWRAM, MLMUPC
Reduce the effects of flooding and droughts on  1.8. Establish an efficient urban wastewater treatment program that includes the      and MME
water supply and quality                             installation of piped sewerage in urban areas, as well as the installation of
                                                     household and community treatment systems.                                       MOWRAM, MOE,
                                                                                                                                      GSSD, NCSD
                                                2.1 Develop a combination of prevention and adaptation measures to reduce the
                                                      effects of flooding and droughts on the availability of good quality water for
                                                      human, industrial and other ecological needs.

                                                55
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                               Theme 8: Biodiversity and Climate Change

1. Background

Cambodia was very conscious about the increasing threats from climate change it was facing at the time
of adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, with more frequent and intensified floods, droughts, saline intrusion and
extreme weather events, an increasing loss of human lives, and significant damage to economic
development and natural resources. Cambodia was highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change due
to its high dependency on climate-sensitive sectors, such as agriculture, water resources, forestry,
fisheries and tourism, all of which form the foundation of its economic growth and support the livelihoods
of a great majority of its population.

The main issues at that time in relation to biodiversity and its associated ecosystem services were (i) the
potential impacts of sea level rise, temperature increase and change in precipitation on biodiversity and
(ii) the potential impacts of climate change mitigation or adaptation measures on biodiversity. The 2002
NBSAP thus contained strategic objectives and priority actions for the integration of biodiversity
conservation and sustainable use into the National Climate Change Action Plan, and for assessing and
addressing climate change impacts on biodiversity.

Since then, the Climate Change Department (CCD) of the Ministry of Environment,, in collaboration with
other partners and with the support of some donors, have been implementing many activities contributing
to biodiversity management. The National Climate Change Committee (NCCC) was established in 2006
with the mandate to coordinate and monitor the implementation of the Governments policies, strategies,
regulations, plans and programmes in response to climate change issues. A Climate Change Technical
Team (CCTT) was established as an inter-ministerial body to provide technical support to the NCCC in
fulfilling its mandate. The Climate Change Department (CCD) within MOE serves as the Secretariat for
the NCCC and coordinates the activities of the CCTT. Its tasks have been to build institutional capacity,
formulate the climate change strategy plan for the next 10 years and promote its implementation, and to
mainstream climate change into planning and budgeting process, while working toward the building of
community resilience and sustainable livelihood in the face of climate change.

The National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) on Climate Change was also developed and
adopted in 2006, and the second national communication was developed in 2007. The following points
were noted in the NAPA for Cambodia (i) key climate-related hazards include: flooding (flash), salt
water intrusion, coastal zone inundation, drought and low flows, windstorms, and storm surge; (ii) the
main human vulnerabilities and livelihood impacts include reduced agricultural production, water
shortage and/or groundwater depletion, and increased disease and/or other health problems; (iii) examples
of priority adaptation projects include vegetation planting for flood and windstorm protection, community
mangrove restoration and sustainable use of natural resources, and production of biopesticides.

As stated in the National Strategic Development Plan Update 2009­2013, the integration of climate
change into national and sub-national level planning, and the development of climate change strategies,
action plans and financing frameworks are among the priority actions undertaken. The Cambodia Climate
Change Strategic Plan 2014­2023 (CCCSP) was adopted in 2013. The strategic objectives of the CCCSP
were formulated in part based on the strategic objectives of the relevant sectors and line ministries,
including in particular MOE and MAFF that are dealing with most of the components of biodiversity.

The following strategic objectives of the CCCSP are directly relevant to biodiversity conservation and
sustainable use: (i) Strategic Objective 1: Promote climate resilience through improving food, water and
energy security; (ii) Strategic Objective 2: Reduce sectoral, regional, and gender vulnerabilities and health
risks related to climate change impacts; and (iii) Strategic Objective 3: Ensure climate resilience of
critical ecosystems (such as Tonle Sap Lake, Mekong River, coastal ecosystems, and the highlands
among others), of biodiversity, protected areas and cultural heritage sites.

2. Issues

Despite the progress made since adopting the 2002 NBSAP, the following key issues have been
identified:

         (a) Potential impacts of sea level rise, temperature increase and change in precipitation on
               biodiversity composition, distribution, survival, and the like;

                                                                56
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

         (b) Potential impacts of climate change mitigation or adaptation measures on biodiversity;

         (c) Limited water resources, as well as limited financial resources and access to agricultural
               techniques;

         (d) Cambodia is among the countries most vulnerable to climate change, particularly to floods,
               droughts and tropical storms. Most Cambodians depend on agriculture, but they lack the
               infrastructure and information necessary to cope with extreme events. Observations of
               climate change over the past 30 to 50 years in the lower Mekong basin show an increase in
               temperature and in rainfall during the wet season, intensified flooding (particularly in the
               Mekong Delta and Cambodia floodplain) and drought events, sea level rise and salinity
               intrusion in the Mekong delta.

In terms of climate change, Cambodia indicates some weaknesses that are listed in the 2013 Cambodia
Climate Change Strategy:

         (a) Weak knowledge and science-based decision making;

         (b) Lack of a clear procedure for the integration of climate change into the national development
               plans;

         (c) Limited capacity of the national institutions responsible for climate change and limited
               participation of stakeholders;

         (d) Out-dated information to address climate impacts;

         (e) Limited human resources;

         (f) Climate change planning is not a common practice;

         (g) Limited knowledge, research and technology;

         (h) Limited financial resources;

         (i) Low adaptive capacity among citizens.

3. Strategic objectives

         The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues

         (a) Strategic objective 1: Assess the actual and projected impact of climate change and climate
                 change mitigation or adaptation measures on genetic resources, species, ecosystems and
                 related ecosystem services, and on sectors depending primarily on biodiversity, in
                 particular agriculture, fisheries and livestock;

         (b) Strategic objective 2: Assess and document the role of biodiversity in climate change
                 mitigation and adaptation measures, and strengthen biodiversity conservation measures that
                 have a positive impact on climate change mitigation and adaptation;

         (c) Strategic objective 3: Minimize anthropogenic pressures such as pollution, exploitation and
                 sedimentation on ecosystems that are vulnerable to climate change, so as to maintain their
                 integrity, functioning and resilience;

         (d) Strategic objective 4: Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation of the
                 actions that promote climate change mitigation and adaptation through the conservation of
                 biodiversity, the sustainable use and, where needed, the restoration of its components.

Implementing the actions identified under these strategic objectives will contribute to achieving the
objectives under all the themes relating to biological resources and ecosystem services conservation and
sustainable use (such as under the themes in Groups 1 and 3). The following actions listed in Table 12
below will also contribute directly to the achievement of Cambodia Biodiversity Targets 11 (on
enhancing ecosystem resilience and the contribution of biodiversity to carbon stocks through conservation
and restoration of degraded ecosystems and thus on contribution to climate change mitigation and
adaptation) and 15 (for the reduction of anthropogenic pressures vulnerable ecosystems impacted by
climate change). These actions are also relevant to many other targets, such as those pursuing effective
management of forests, agriculture, aquaculture, fisheries and animal production.

                                                                57
                                                                                                      National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Table 12: Key actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their implementation under the theme on "Biodiversity and Climate
             Change"

Strategic Objectives                                                                     Key Actions                                                       Coordinating
                                                                                                                                                                 and

                                                                                                                                                           participating
                                                                                                                                                           ministries and

                                                                                                                                                              agencies

Strategic objective 1:                                          1.1 Assess the current and projected impact of sea level rise, increased temperature,      MOE, MAFF,
                                                                      drought and natural disasters on biological resources and related ecosystems         MWRM, GSSD
Assess the current and projected impact of climate change and         resulting directly or indirectly from climate change and requiring priority
climate change mitigation or adaptation measures on genetic           conservation in Cambodia. The focus will be primarily on identifying areas that      MOE, GSSD
resources, species, ecosystems and related ecosystem services,        are naturally resilient to climate change and on the impacts on agricultural and     MAFF
and on sectors depending primarily on biodiversity, in                fishery productivity and sustainability, as well as on animal and human health
particular agriculture, fisheries and livestock
                                                                1.2 Review the impact of climate change mitigation or adaptation measures taken,
                                                                      particularly the establishment of PAs and conservation areas, on genetic
                                                                      resources, species, ecosystems and related ecosystem services, and on
                                                                      agriculture, fisheries and livestock

                                                                1.3 Increase the resilience of vulnerable local communities to the impacts of climate GSSD and

                                                                change on biodiversity.                                                                    MOE

                                                                1.4 Assess the vulnerability of the different components of biodiversity (genetic          MOE, GSSD,
                                                                      resources, species and ecosystems) to climate change and, on that basis, prioritize  MAFF
                                                                      adaptation measures for key regions of Cambodia, such as coastal zones,
                                                                      highlands, rural and urban areas threatened by climate change, as well protected
                                                                      area management effectiveness

                                                                1.5 Identify and assess factors that exacerbate the effects of climate change (e.g.        MOE, GSSD
                                                                      coastal area erosion, silting of lakes, establishment of dams etc.)                  MAFF

Strategic objective 2:                                          2.1 Document the role of conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity                  MOE, GSSD
                                                                     (particularly in protected areas or conservation areas), recovery and re-             MAFF
Assess and document the role of biodiversity in climate change       introduction of species, and restoration of degraded ecosystems for climate
mitigation and adaptation measures, and strengthen                   change mitigation and adaptation, and for combating desertification and disaster
biodiversity conservation measures that have a positive impact       risk reduction

                      58
                                                                  National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

on climate change mitigation and adaptation                       2.2 Assess the effectiveness of the protected area system in place; its effectiveness in  MOE, GSSD
                                                                       the conservation of species, genetic resources and ecosystems against current and    MAFF
                                                                       predicted climate impacts.

                                                                  2.3 Identify and address the gaps in the protected area system, bearing in mind the possible MOE, GSSD

                                                                  range shifts in plant and animal species populations in the face of climate change.       MAFF

                                                                  2.4 Ensure climate resilience of critical ecosystems (such as Tonle Sap Lake, cultural    MOE, GSSD
                                                                       heritage sites, Mekong River, lowland deciduous dipterocarp forests, coastal         MAFF
                                                                       ecosystems, and highlands.) through the strengthening of the national protected
                                                                       area system (see Theme 1 above) consisting of protected areas and conservation
                                                                       areas that are ecologically representative, effectively managed, well connected
                                                                       and well integrated in wider landscapes and seascapes.

                                                                  2.5 Enhance the contribution of ecosystems to carbon sequestration through REDD+,         MOE, GSSD
                                                                       the establishment and/or restoration of protected forests, community forests and     MAFF
                                                                       wildlife corridors.

                                                                  2.6 Adopt farming systems (e.g. multiple cropping systems, use of biomass mulching, MOE, GSSD

                                                                  low greenhouse gas emission agriculture and animal production) that are more              MAFF

                                                                  resilient to climate change and that emit less greenhouse gases.

Strategic objective 3:                                            3.1 Minimize pollution in development projects (see in particular themes 4 on mining, MOE, GSSD

Minimize anthropogenic pressures (such as pollution,              7 on water resources and 11 on marine and coastal resources)                              MAFF
exploitation and sedimentation) on ecosystems that are
vulnerable to climate change, so as to maintain their integrity,  3.2 Promote recycling and re-use of wastes, and of systems with reduced wastes (see       MOE, GSSD
functioning and resilience                                             in particular themes 5 on environmental security, 7 water resources and 17 on        MAFF
                                                                       industry, technology and services.)

                                                                  3.3 Carry out biodiversity-inclusive environmental impact assessment for public           MOE, GSSD
                                                                       works and development projects.                                                      MAFF

                                             59
                                                                                                         National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                                                    3.4 Ensure that protected areas and conservation areas are effectively managed         MOE, GSSD
                                                                         through robust patrolling and zonation plans to limit climate induced pressures   MAFF
                                                                         through increased exploitation

Strategic objective 4:                                              4.1 Enhance participation in climate change assessments and response activities, as    MOE, GSSD
                                                                                                                                                           MAFF
Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation of the   well as cooperation and coordination frameworks for addressing climate change
actions that promote climate change mitigation and adaptation       within the commitments under the multilateral environmental agreements,
through the conservation of biodiversity, the sustainable use and,  essentially through:
where needed, the restoration of its components
                                                                    a. the mainstreaming of climate change in the relevant sectors;

                                                                    b. participatory land-use planning;

                                                                    c. South-South cooperation, e.g. under the ASEAN framework and trans-

                                                                    boundary initiatives within the Mekong River Basin framework, as well as

                                                                    North-South collaboration.

                                                                    4.2 Mobilize financial resources and support for implementation of actions under this  MOE, GSSD
                                                                          theme, involving a number of well-coordinated mechanisms, with a mix of          MAFF
                                                                          traditional and innovative instruments related to climate finance, such as the
                                                                          Adaptation Fund, the Green Climate Fund, payment for ecosystem services
                                                                          including within REDD+, financial and fiscal incentives, carbon market
                                                                          mechanisms, and public-private partnerships.

                                                                    4.3 Develop and implement well-targeted education, training, communication and         MOE, GSSD
                                                                          awareness-raising programmes.                                                    MAFF,
                                                                                                                                                           MOEYS

                                                                    4.4 Strengthen the clearing-house mechanism and other means (such as radio,            MOE, GSSD
                                                                          television, newspapers, mobile and web technologies and targeted outreach        MAFF
                                                                          materials) for improved access to relevant information, knowledge management,
                                                                          and technical and technological cooperation on climate change issues.

                                                                    4.5 Strengthen the capacity for collection, analysis, modelling and interpretation of  MOE, GSSD
                                                                          climate data; for information management and dissemination to various end-       MAFF
                                                                          users, including seasonal forecasting for adaptation and community early-
                                                                          warning facilities for disaster risk management; and for technology acquisition
                                                                          and adaptation to the country situation.

                        60
    National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

    4.6 Strengthen institutions and coordination frameworks for national climate change  MOE, GSSD
          responses and application of relevant policies, related legal frameworks and   MAFF
          action plans, and application of enforcing mechanisms.

    4.7 Promote and encourage community-and ecosystem-based natural resources            MOE, GSSD
          management approaches as cost-effective ways of addressing climate change.     MAFF

61
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

             GROUP 2: SUSTAINABLE USE OF BIODIVERSITY (Themes 9-16)

                        Theme 9: Sustainable Forest Resources Management

1. Background

It was recognized in the 2009 NSDS that forests provide many significant resources, functions and
services, including providing many primary and secondary economic products, recreational opportunities,
wildlife habitat, water and soil conservation, a filter for pollutants, in addition to absorbing CO2 and
producing oxygen. Forest biodiversity provides not only timber but a wide range of non-timber forest
resources including bushmeat, and food, medicinal and cosmetic plants, as well as wildlife and a diversity
of landscapes of interest for example to tourism. Forests contain sources of water and perform services
such as air purification, maintenance of soil fertility and biota, and soil and water conservation, all of
which are essential to human well-being.

In addition to supporting biodiversity, forests also support employment and traditional uses by the people.
There is a general concern over the human impact on forest health and the natural processes of forest
growth and regeneration. The human threat to forest resources has been increasing in the form of illegal
logging activities and inappropriate forest subproduct collection, including land clearing for agriculture
and ownership. The volume of forest logging increased dramatically in the early 1990s given that it was
one of the major sources of income for rural people, and of revenue for different factions.

At the time of adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, deforestation was estimated to occur at a rate seven times
higher than the sustainable level due to the extraction of firewood and charcoal production. It was
acknowledged, at the policy level, that the long-term benefits from the country's forest resources could be
optimized through proper conservation and management of forest ecosystems. In addition to providing
environmental benefits, the sound management of forests was also considered to be a source of long-term
income for the government, the people living in or near forested areas, and the private sector involved in
forest management. Opportunities to reverse deforestation included the development of sustainable forest
management plans and better monitoring of forest concessions, improved capacity for law enforcement, and the
establishment of forest plantations with both fast growing exotic as well as domestic hardwood species.

At the time, the primary challenges included over-harvesting of trees for timber, firewood and charcoal
production; ineffective law enforcement; impacts of public works such as road building; watershed
degradation; limited extent of forest demarcation; incomplete understanding of the status, trends and
values associated with forest resources and forest ecosystem services, and limited awareness and
application of best management practices.

The 2002 NBSAP addressed these challenges to ensure the sustainable protection, use and management
of forests and woodlands, and to improve the efficiency and sustainability of extraction, transformation
and use of timber and non-timber forest products. The specific objectives and actions were articulated
around the development of a comprehensive national plan for the sustainable management of the
countrys forest estate. The plan incorporated the following objectives:

         (a) Reforestation using native species, while restricting the introduction of exotic species, and
               while rehabilitating the degraded forest areas;

         (b) Strengthening of law enforcement to prevent illegal logging, including extension of the
               Forest Crime Monitoring Unit and application of environmental impact assessments to forest
               harvesting activities;

         (c) Monitoring and evaluation of forest concession allocation and management;

         (d) Involvement of local communities in forest protection, management and improvement;

         (e) Promotion of environmentally friendly forestry practices;

         (f) Monitoring of the status and trends of forest cover and resources;

         (g) Delineation of the permanent forest estate for conservation, community use and industrial
               protection, and forest inventories and damage assessment.

There has been considerable progress since the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, but much remains to be
accomplished to achieve its objectives:

                                                                62
                                                                   National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

(a) Cambodia enacted the Forestry Law in 2002, which defines the framework for management,
     harvesting, use, development and conservation of forests throughout the country. The
     objective of the Forestry Law is to ensure the sustainable management of forests for their
     social, economic and environmental benefits, including the conservation of biological
     diversity and cultural heritage. Under the Forestry Law, the state ensures customary user
     rights of forest products and by-products for local communities. It also confirms that the
     management of forests is under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and
     Fisheries (MAFF), with the exception of the management of flooded forests, which is
     covered under a different law, and delegates the authority to manage Protected Areas to the
     Ministry of Environment. Article 4 of the Forestry Law states that prior to major forest
     ecosystem related activities that might significantly impact the environment and social
     conditions, an environmental and social impact assessment must be conducted.

(b) The CMDG target of maintaining forest cover at 60% in 2015, bringing it down from
     61.15% in 2002 was not met (forest cover was about 57.59% in 2009). The causes of
     deforestation and forest degradation have not yet been reduced sufficiently. These causes
     include the high levels of poverty resulting from the countrys long civil war and social
     dislocations, which led to increases in illegal forest activities and weak law enforcement;
     rapid population growth and the subsequent overharvesting of forest resources, and the
     clearing of forests to support the expansion of subsistence agriculture; and the insufficient
     number of Forestry Administration (FA) staff, as well as their often-limited technical capacities,
     insufficient amount of available equipment, and lack of cross-sectoral collaboration.

(c) The Rectangular Strategy (RS)-Phase II (2008-2013), which is a national socio-economic
     development policy agenda, focused on four components, including (i) agricultural
     development; (ii) infrastructure rehabilitation development; (iii) private sector development
     and employment creation; and (iv) capacity building and human resource development. The
     priorities for forestry reform included law enforcement, effective management of protected
     areas, climate change actions and the promotion of community forestry programs.

(d) It should be emphasized that the decline of forest resources and forestland has had impacts
     on the socio-economic lives of rural communities; the deteriorated ecological functions
     affect local agriculture and animal husbandry. As a result, the rural population has had to
     travel to more distant forest areas to satisfy their requirements for forest products, resulting
     in conflicts with other communities or law enforcement officers. The lack of clear
     demarcations, classifications and registration distorts the interpretation of land tenure and
     user rights, both of which are essential elements in management planning and conflict
     prevention and resolution. Local communities are gradually turning to their adjacent
     degraded forests to initiate protection measures in order to restore forests and livelihoods.

(e) As stated in the report on the Cambodias MDG, "according to national census figures from
     1998 to 2008, domestic fuelwood dependency decreased only from 90.4% of households to
     83.6%, a figure still much higher than the current linear path target of 64.7%. If charcoal is
     included in fuelwood consumption, the figure rises to 91.1% (charcoal was not included in
     the baseline). Using a more precise measurement of fuelwood consumption, the Ministry of
     Mines, Industry and Energy (MIME) estimated the 2008 figure at 73% of households and
     projected this would be 54% in 2013." In the short term, the Government is promoting
     affordable and efficient commercial cooking stoves as a strategy to reduce fuelwood
     consumption. One million efficient cooking stoves have been produced since 2003, saving
     an estimated 5,000ha of forest over that same period. In the long term, the Government is
     pursuing a strategy for rural electrification supplemented by various small-scale renewable
     energy programs. These actions to reduce dependence on fuelwood should be scaled up
     together with improvements in farming techniques, and engagement in an active programme
     of forest rehabilitation and reforestation, including commercial plantations.

(f) Building on the 2002 Forestry Law the RGC has embedded forestry sector reforms into the
     Cambodian National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) 2009-2013, as well as into the
     countrys Rectangular Strategy for Growth, Employment, Equity and Efficiency in
     Cambodia ­ Phase II of the fourth legislature policy priorities. In 2010, the RGC approved a
     National Forest Programme (NFP) aligned with those strategies, with the following priority

                                                      63
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

               programme areas to be addressed from 2011 to 2029: (i) forest demarcation taking into
               account both the Forestry Law (2002) and the Land Law (2001) and the classification and
               registration of forest as "Production Forests", "Protection Forests" or "Conversion Forests";
               (ii) conservation and development of forest resources and biodiversity; (iii) forest law
               enforcement and governance; (iv) community forestry programme; (v) capacity and research
               development; and (vi) sustainable forest financing. Biodiversity elements of the 2010 NPF
               strategy have been integrated into this updated NBSAP.

         (g) The Cambodia REDD+ National Roadmap outlines the national plan for ,,REDD+ Readiness
               activities; and the National Policy and Strategic Plan for Green Growth recognizes the role
               of REDD+ in sustainable forest management and conservation in Cambodia.

         (h) Other supportive legislations and sub-decrees include the 1993 Royal Decree on the Creation
               and Designation of Protected Areas, the 1996 Law on Environmental Protection and
               National Resources Management, the 2003 Sub-decree on Community Forestry
               Management, the 2008 Law on Protected Areas, and other forest-related sub-decrees.

         (i) Cambodias post 2002 achievements in its commitment to manage forests sustainably
               include the following:

                           Illegal logging and other human pressures that deplete forest areas have declined or
                           been eradicated in many areas as people are now complying more often with
                           forest-related regulations and policies;

                           The adoption of Codes of Practice for sustainable forest management;

                           The termination of forest concession agreements with 15 companies with a
                           cumulative forest area greater than 3 million ha, some of which have been converted to
                           protected forests, and the decision to require remaining forest concession companies
                           to develop approved Sustainable Forest Management Plans and Environmental and
                           Social Impact Assessments and sign new investment agreements;

                           The designation of 20 additional Protected Forest and Biodiversity Conservation
                           areas administered by the Forestry Administration of MAFF covering 1.63 million
                           hectares21 and 8 fish conservation areas administered by the Fisheries Administration;

                           The termination of agreements of commercial fishing lots and subsequent
                           reservation for local community use. Community forest management is where the
                           local community takes responsibility for sustainable forest management with the
                           support from the Forest Administration; and the supply and income from forest
                           products can help to reduce poverty;

                           The decision that the remaining forest resources of the country shall be considered
                           as Permanent Forest Estate to be managed by promoting conservation and sustainable
                           forest management initiatives that directly contribute to the rehabilitation and
                           conservation of a maximum stock of forested land and forest resources; and

                           Development of a Forest Gene Conservation Strategy under the DANIDA
                           supported Cambodia Tree Seed Project, in which 34 indigenous tree species have
                           priority status for conservation; 7 distinct gene-ecological zones have been
                           established on the basis of bio-climate, vegetation, physiography and soil; a seed
                           source registration system and the initiation of community participation in forest
                           gene conservation and tree seed source management has been developed.

2. Issues

Despite the progress that has been accomplished since the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, the following
issues have been identified, recognizing that forest biodiversity is a broad term that includes the variety
and variability of animals, plants and micro-organisms found in forests at the genetic, species and
ecosystem levels which are necessary to sustain forest functions, structures and processes:

         (a) Incomplete understanding of the status and trends associated with forest resources;

         (b) Continued deforestation, forest ecosystem/habitat fragmentation, conversion to agricultural
               land and degradation associated with: infrastructure development (road building,

                                                                64
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

               urbanization, mining), watershed degradation, forest fires, and illegal logging;
         (c) Climate change;
         (d) Introduction and spread of invasive alien plant and animal species;
         (e) Over-harvesting of trees for timber, fuelwood and charcoal production; and non-timber

               forest products (plants and animals, including bushmeat);
         (f) Overhunting or illegal trade of wildlife;
         (g) Overgrazing;
         (h) Limited community-managed forest areas and use of traditional knowledge;
         (i) Water pollution;
         (j) Inadequate law enforcement and conflicts over rights of access and use that enable illegal

               logging and encroachment/land grabbing;
         (k) Incomplete forest demarcation;
         (l) Limited effectiveness of protected forests;

         (m) Limited individual technical and institutional capacities and knowledge;
         (n) Sectoral land-use planning at the expense of effective collaborations between ministries and

               institutions; and
         (o) Limited financial resources, including limited forestry revenues not reinvested into the

               sector.

3. Strategic objectives
         The following strategic objectives were adopted to address these identified issues:
         (a) Strategic objective 1: Identify, inventory, monitor and enhance awareness about forest
               genetic resources, species, ecosystems and related ecosystem services that are important for
               sustainable development and poverty eradication in Cambodia;
         (b) Strategic objective 2: Identify and describe the direct and indirect factors and processes that
               are impacting Cambodias forest resources and forest functions, and apply as appropriate,
               preventive and corrective measures;
         (c) Strategic objective 3: Maintain or strengthen measures that have a positive impact on forest
               biodiversity and thus enhance the benefits from forest resources and, in general, forest
               ecosystems, to all Cambodians;
         (d) Strategic objective 4: Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation of the
               actions identified under the strategic objectives relating to forests.
         The implementation of the strategic objectives on forest resources and forest landscapes will be

supported by the implementation of several of the actions that are listed under all the other themes. The
actions identified in Table 13 will contribute directly to the achievement of the national targets for
biodiversity 1, 2, 5, 6, 8, 9 to 12, 15 to 20, and, vice versa, implementation of actions under each of these
targets will support the achievement of the targets relating to forests. Each of these targets will support
the achievement of the NSDS vision that by 2030 Cambodia will possess forests that cover a large part of
the country and are well protected, that are rich in biodiversity and providing valuable environmental
services, and that are managed in a sustainable manner in order to contribute effectively to the reduction
of the impacts of climate change and to allow sustainable timber production and a sustainable supply of
energy resources and nontimber forest products for the people of Cambodia, in particular its rural
communities.

                                                                65
                                                                        National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Table 13: Key actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their implementation under the theme on "Sustainable Forest
             Resources Management"

Strategic Objectives                                       Key Actions                                                                                 Coordinating
                                                                                                                                                     and participating

                                                                                                                                                       ministries and
                                                                                                                                                          agencies

Strategic objective 1:                                     1.1 Improve knowledge and understanding of the status and trends of forest types          MAFF, MOE,
                                                                 and their coverage and functions in Cambodia, as well as the associated             GSSD
Identify, inventory, monitor and enhance awareness about         traditional knowledge of those forests, by conducting local, regional and
forest genetic resources, species, ecosystems and related        national assessments and organizing information in databases and through the
ecosystem services that are important for sustainable            national clearing-house mechanism on:
development and poverty eradication in Cambodia.
                                                                (a) The status and trend of different components of forest biodiversity (including
                                                                     plants, animals and microorganisms) with an emphasis on those components
                                                                     that are the most critical to the functioning of forest ecosystems or sea- and
                                                                     landscapes, that are important to sustainable development and poverty
                                                                     eradication, and that require priority conservation;

                                                                (b) The roles and values of biodiversity components, including their
                                                                     contributions to the mitigation of climate change and the national economy
                                                                     and the socioeconomic and environmental impacts of forest cover and
                                                                     biodiversity loss, as well as forest ecosystem degradation;

                                                                (c) More specifically, the role and value of forests in socioecological production
                                                                     landscapes (SEPLs);

                                                                (d) The extraction of timber, fuelwood and non-timber forest products;

                                                                (e) The pressures impacting forest landscapes and resources, including mangroves;

                                                                (f) Traditional knowledge and customary protocols associated with the countrys
                                                                     forests; and

                                                                (g) Technology available for the conservation and sustainable use of forest
                                                                     resources and landscapes.

                                                           1.2 Identify ecologically or biologically significant forest areas and areas that are     MAFF, MOE,
                                                                 vulnerable or particularly sensitive to climate change and other anthropogenic      GSSD
                                                                 pressures.

                                                           1.3 Enhance awareness of the status, trends, values and threats to forests resources      MAFF, MOE
                                                                 and landscapes.                                                                     GSSD

                      66
                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Strategic objective 2:                                       2.1 Identify direct and indirect factors negatively affecting all types of forests in     MAFF, MOE
                                                                   Cambodia, and identify priority components of forest landscapes. Assess their       GSSD
Identify and describe the direct and indirect factors and          impacts and establish a national monitoring program.
processes that are impacting Cambodia's forest resources                                                                                               MAFF, MOE,
and forest functions, and apply, as appropriate, preventive  2.2 Using macro land-use planning that allows for holistic planning across sectors,       GSSD, MOP
and corrective measures.                                           jurisdictions and local government borders (Objective 3 of the National Forest
                                                                   Programme 2010 ­ 2029(NFP)), and taking into account modern sustainable
                                                                   management models adaptive to changing contexts (NFP objective 8), as well as
                                                                   the 2002 Forest Law, the 2001 Land Law and related sub-decrees,

                                                                   a. Demarcate forest boundaries, classify and register forest types in the
                                                                         country;

                                                                   b. Develop and implement a comprehensive national plan for the management
                                                                         of the forest estate, including the revision and updating of the present
                                                                         legislation regarding all aspects of forest resources protection and
                                                                         conservation and moving towards forest certification according to
                                                                         international norms; protection of resource tenure rights and practices of
                                                                         local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities; expansion of
                                                                         community-based forestry and other participatory management processes;
                                                                         and the development of plantation forestry to increase the forest area under
                                                                         sustainable management;

                                                                   c. Develop plans for community-based forest management, including
                                                                         guidelines for community forestry initiatives and other types of community
                                                                         forestry (e.g. Community-Based Production Forestry, Community
                                                                         Conservation Forestry, Community Protected Areas) to ensure the
                                                                         protection and conservation of forest resources (NFP objective 7) and forest
                                                                         landscapes;

                                                                   d. Restore and rehabilitate prioritized forest landscapes.

                                                             2.3 Adopt measures and policies, including the application of environmental impact        MAFF, MOE
                                                                   assessment, forest certification (NFP sub-programme) and customary                  GSSD
                                                                   sustainable use practices, as well as forest law enforcement, to significantly
                                                                   reduce deforestation and forest degradation.

                                                             2.4 Provide appropriate incentives to encourage the private sector to establish           MAFF, MOE,
                                                                   commercial forest plantations on degraded forestland based on agreed technical      GSSD
                                                                   standards.

67
                                                              National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                                              2.5 Prevent the introduction and/or spread of invasive alien species that threaten       MAFF, MOE,
                                                                    forest ecosystems and mitigate their negative impacts by arresting their spread    GSSD
                                                                    and attempting to eradicate them if they have been previously introduced. More
                                                                    specifically, develop policies and guidelines promoting the use of native species
                                                                    in cultivation and restricting the introduction of introduced species.

                                                              2.6 Adapt to climate change and mitigate its effects on forest-based livelihoods         MAFF, MOE,
                                                                    (NFP Objective 2) through:                                                         GSSD

                                                                    a. Tree planting and forest plantations (NFP sub-programme);

                                                                    b. The reduction of deforestation and forest degradation, in line with the
                                                                          REDD+ National Strategy and programmes;

                                                                    c. The protection of selected forest areas; and

                                                                    d. The restoration of forest ecosystems and recovery of forest components.

                                                              2.7 Promote the sustainable use of forest resources including non-timber forest          MAFF, MOE,
                                                                    products (such as bushmeat) and the various services derived from forest           GSSD
                                                                    biodiversity

                                                              2.8 Establish and support small- and medium scale forest-based enterprises or            MAFF, MOE,
                                                                    cooperatives operating in each forestry cantonment for the processing of wood      GSSD
                                                                    for export, as well as the processing of non-timber forest products

                                                              2.9 Reduce losses associated with unsustainable harvesting of timber and non-            MAFF, MOE,
                                                                    timber forest resources.                                                           GSSD

                                                              2.10 Support activities relating to the Satoyama Initiative for the rehabilitation and   MAFF, MOE
                                                                    strengthening of socioecological production landscapes (SEPL)                      GSSD

                                                              2.11 Implement the Nagoya Protocol in relation to forest resources.                      MAFF, MOE,
                                                                                                                                                       GSSD

Strategic objective 3:                                        3.1 Maximize sustainable forest contributions to poverty reduction, enhanced             MAFF, MOE,
                                                                    livelihoods and equitable economic growth (NFP Objective 1) by:                    GSSD, MOP
Maintain or strengthen measures that have a positive
impact on forest biodiversity and thus enhance the benefits        a. Ensuring that management of protected forests and protection forests is
from forest resources and, in general, forest ecosystems, to            effective.

                                                                   b. Support the benefits derived from socioecological production landscapes

68
                                                                                                            National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

all in Cambodia                                              within the Satoyama Initiative.

Strategic objective 4:                                  c. Develop and implement programmes and plans supporting new processing
Strengthen the enabling environment for the                  technologies for high-value forest products and by-products (NFP sub-
implementation of the actions identified under the           programme) that will expand market opportunities and increase forest
strategic objectives relating to forests                     contribution to poverty reduction, enhanced livelihoods, and economic
                                                             development, while safeguarding environmental services.

                                                        d. Improve the sharing/distribution of incomes collected from the forestry sector.

                                                        4.1 Assess the needs of human and research capacities and develop a programme to MAFF, MOE

                                                        address those needs (NFP sub-programme 5.1 and 5.3).                                  GSSD

                                                        4.2 Raise the capacity of institutions and the quality of education dealing with      MAFF, MOE
                                                              forests (NFP objective 6).                                                      GSSD

                                                        4.3 Extend and further support community forestry.                                    MAFF

                                                        4.4 Train local communities, the private sector and local forest administrations in   MAFF, MRD
                                                              sustainable forest management.                                                  GSSD, MOE

                                                        4.5 Ensure maximum participation from the private sector and local communities in MAFF, MRD

                                                        forest conservation and management for sustainable development.                       MOE, GSSD

                                                        4.6 Enhance the monitoring, inspection and evaluation capacities and capacities for MAFF, MOE

                                                        reporting on sustainable forest management.                                           GSSD

                                                        4.7 Improve forest law enforcement and governance (FLEG) at all levels (NFP           MAFF, MOE
                                                              objective 4) in particular through:                                             GSSD
                                                              a. The expansion of the Forest Crime Monitoring Unit (FCMU) project;
                                                              b. Enforcement of the implementation of the Forestry Law;                       MAFF, MOE
                                                              c. The development of conflict management system (NFP objective 5);             GSSD
                                                              d. The strengthening of enforcement in protected areas and protected forests
                                                                    and the improvement of policies to support these efforts.

                                                        4.8 Develop diversified sustainable financing systems for the forestry sector,
                                                              including the use of the National Forestry Development Fund established in the
                                                              2002 Forestry Law (NFP objective 9).

                                                    69
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                  Theme 10: Sustainable Freshwater Fisheries and Aquaculture

1. Background

Cambodia is one of the four largest fish producers in South-East Asia, specializing in fresh water fish
from rivers, ponds and lakes. The Mekong River and Tonle Sap Lake are the main freshwater areas.
Together with rice, fish constitutes the foundation of food security in Cambodia. In 2009, the fish catch
from the Tonle Sap Lake represented about 60% of the total commercial fish catch of the country. The
fishery sector contributes to around 5 to 10% of the GDP, while fish makes up 40% of the rural
populations animal protein intake. Fisheries play a crucial role in supplying food for the Cambodian
people, as well as in supporting the national economy.

As stated in the 2010 CMDG report, fisheries in Cambodia underwent reforms in 2000. Seventy-eight
fishing lots were completely released and 81 fishing lots were partly released, resulting in a total area of
541,206 ha out of total 953,740 ha (56.74%) released for family-scale fishing by September 2010. The
number of community fisheries (CFi) increased from 246 in 2002 to 469 in 2010, covering an area of
683,734 ha (of which 236, covering an area of 553,438 ha, are registered), with plans to reach 470
registered in 2015. In addition, 390 Community Fish Refuges (CFR) (1,170 ha) and 335 fish sanctuaries
(46,618 ha) have been established. In 2012, Cambodia underwent another round of fishery reforms, with
the closure of all fishing lots (80 fishing lots) covering a total area of 412,534 ha by keeping 50 new
fisheries as conservation areas (97,503 ha) and community fisheries (315,031 ha). Currently, there are
516 community fisheries (998,765 ha) and 58 freshwater fisheries conservation areas (120,003 ha), which
is equal to 10.23% of the total freshwater fishing areas. For coastal areas, Fisheries Administration has
been establishing the first Marine Fisheries Management area located in Koh Rong, Preah Sihanouk
province with the total area of 44,000 ha.

In recent years, the volume of fish caught has dropped due to the increasing number of fishers. Reports
indicate that some fish species, particularly among the larger size species, are becoming endangered.
Additional threats to fisheries were compiled in the Strategic Planning Framework 2010-2019 for
Fisheries ­ Cambodia. They include: (i) loss of breeding habitat and declining wild stocks because of:
climate change leading to changes in water levels, flow rates and flooding patterns, (ii) environmental
degradation from pollution and increased mining sediment, (iii) damming, land conversion and
deforestation, (iv) increased pressure on the resource due to economic and population growth factors, (v)
increased international trade competition and more stringent import regulations, (vi) uncontrolled, illegal
and destructive fishing, leading to conflict, (vii) disease, especially in aquaculture, and (viii) loss of land
for fisheries due to weaknesses in land management.

Aquaculture systems were encouraged to correct this situation and ensure a sustainable fish supply. The
importance of aquaculture development was underscored in the Second Five-Year Fisheries Sector
Development Plan 2001-2005, and the development of freshwater and marine aquaculture was listed
among the goals of the Agricultural Development Plan 2000-200522. The Fisheries Department with the
assistance of development agencies has actively promoted aquaculture in the uplands. This aquaculture is
predominantly based on introduced species of fish and as such may be a serious threat to native fish-
stocks. Adding to the threat, there are no guidelines for the importation of exotic species for culture that
take into account environmental impact studies and environmental standards for fish-farms. The 2006
Law on Fisheries contains a chapter on aquaculture and makes general provisions on inland aquaculture
and mariculture authorizations, water quality and discharge of waste matter, and on import, export and
transport of live or fresh fish and processed fish products.

Fisheries management in Cambodia is divided between central and local governments. At the central level, the
Department of Fisheries of the MAFF is responsible for developing research and drafting laws and policies on
fisheries (and aquaculture) and is vested with inspecting powers. At the local level, fisheries are managed by the
Provincial-Urban Fishery Authorities, which ensure compliance with the law in the area under their jurisdiction.

Fisheries in Cambodia are organized into industrial (large-scale), artisanal (medium- scale) and family
fisheries (small-scale). They use different fishing times and fishing gears. Fishing gears and methods can
be divided in two broad categories: limited access fisheries mainly for industrial fisheries and open access
fisheries. The number of open access fisheries has grown significantly in recent years and can be
categorized into small-scale or family fisheries, licensed fisheries and illegal fisheries. Small-scale or
family fisheries are permitted to use diverse fishing gears; restrictions apply only on the size of the gears.

                                                                70
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Unlike medium- and large-scale fishing which is restricted to the open season only, small-scale or family
fishing is not restricted to a set season but is permitted all year round. Illegal fisheries are those fishing
practices referred to as illegal in the 2006 Law on Fisheries, such as brush parks and explosives.

At the time of the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, the main issues with freshwater fisheries and aquaculture
had to do with unsustainable and illegal fishing; insufficient protection of selected fish areas and related
capacity building activities to correct the limited awareness and to increase expertise, including within
local communities and for the demarcation of fishing areas; and weak law enforcement.

Since the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, the MAFF Department of Fisheries Conservation of the Fisheries
Administration has demarcated many fisheries conservation areas, reviewed and reduced the fishing lot
system to enhance community-based fisheries management. The Government has shown strong political
will and the Prime Minister responded to this with the closure of 80 fishing lots in 201223. All fishing lots
throughout Cambodia have now been cancelled. A range of projects were undertaken to support
sustainable fisheries, including but not limited to the Tonle Sap Environmental Management
Project/Sustainable Livelihoods Project and ECOSORN,, along with environmental education and
training, land-use planning, resource zonation, community development, small scale industrial
development, fish and agriculture products processing, and involvement of local authorities. As part of
the fishery monitoring and protection activities, fish conservation areas have been established including 8
fish sanctuaries under the authority of the MAFF Fisheries Administration 24.

The 2006 Law on Fisheries was promulgated "to ensure fisheries and fishery resource management,
enhance aquaculture development, the management of production and processing, and to promote the
livelihood of people in local communities for the social-economic and environmental benefits, including
the sustainability of the conservation of biodiversity and natural culture heritages in the Kingdom". Since
then, the fisheries sector has undergone major reforms within the framework of the ten-year Strategic
Plan 2009-2018 and the first three-year-rolling on Fishery Sector Development Action Plan, 2009-2011.
These Plans have been developed based on the Cambodian Code of Conduct for Responsible Fishery. The
Fisheries Administration also tightened its efforts in preventing and suppressing flooded forest land-
grabbing25. Additional supportive legislations include, among others, the 2005 Royal Decree on the
Establishment of Community Fisheries26 and the 2005 Sub Decree of Community Fisheries Management27.

However, as reported in the 2009 NSDS, the fish stock remained under threat by direct and indirect
factors, including overfishing, destructive fishing practices, destruction of fish habitats, increased
sedimentation, water pollution and impacts by upstream dam development. The following obstacles to
fisheries were highlighted: (i) insufficient information on fishing lot boundaries in relation to protected
areas; (ii) limited enforcement of the fishery policy and regulations; (iii) limited community experience in
fishery management; (iv) unclear size of fishing lots, and illegal use of prohibited fishing gear and fishing
activities during the fish spawning period. Also, when faced with limited fish yields to support their
livelihoods, local fishers started undertaking other activities that easily become unsustainable when they
are not properly organized, such as extraction from inundated forests, collection of fuelwood and
production of charcoal, or hunting waterfowl and wildlife.

Regarding species used in aquaculture, although the importance of using native species is known, there is
a shortage of suitable indigenous fish species for aquaculture production and insufficient support to carry
out studies to identify them.

As stated in the 2016 Cambodias National Biodiversity Status Report Update, the Fisheries
Administration developed, in collaboration with World Fish and the Inland Fisheries Research and
Development Institute (IFReDI), a comprehensive fish species list for Cambodia. "There are growing
concerns that the trend in reducing fish species diversity is a sign of unsustainable harvest and potentially
a tipping point for the fishery. Furthermore, there is a trend toward increased damming of the Mekong
and its tributaries, which could further impact fish species diversity as stream flows and migration routes
are altered. As highlighted in Cambodias Fifth National Report to the Convention on Biological
Diversity, the Government has taken quite strong action, by removing the previous fishing concesssions
on the Tonle Sap Lake while also promoting aquaculture and community fisheries. [...] Fish diversity in
Cambodia, across both fresh and salt water systems includes 1357 species".

                                                                71
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

2. Issues

The following are key issues surrounding freshwater fisheries and aquaculture:

         (a) Information deficiencies, limited knowledge about the fishery resources, and poor statistics
               especially for capture fish;

         (b) Destructive fishing practices;

         (c) Overexploitation of fisheries (illegal fishing and over-fishing);

         (d) Shortage of suitable indigenous fish species for aquaculture production;

         (e) Development of dams, irrigation and flood control programs that negatively impact fish habitats;

         (f) Insufficient protection of critical aquatic habitat (fish sanctuaries);

         (g) Weak law enforcement;

         (h) Insufficient or lack of demarcated fishing areas, and of flooded forest and zones/areas within
               approved areas for fishery conservation and management;

         (i) Insufficiently trained fishery staff for development of community fisheries;

         (j) Improper management skills and training by communities;

         (k) Limited understanding of local fishers of relevant legislations concerning the conservation
               and management of aquatic fishery resources

         (l) Lack of management plans for a number of fishery management and conservation areas;

         (m) Lack of a trans-boundary fishery management body between Cambodia and the Lao PDR;

         (n) Poorly documented impact of climate change on aquatic fishery habitats and aquatic species;

         (o) Limited assessment, monitoring and evaluation of aquatic fishery resources;

         (p) Flood destruction of forest boundaries; and

         (q) Market distortions, perverse subsidies and transboundary issues.

3. Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues:

         (a) Strategic objective 1: Identify, inventory, monitor and enhance awareness about freshwater
               resources including fish varieties used in aquaculture;

         (b) Strategic objective 2: Identify and describe the major direct and indirect factors and
               processes that are negatively impacting Cambodias freshwater fisheries and aquaculture,
               and apply, as appropriate, preventive and corrective measures;

         (c) Strategic objective 3: Maintain or strengthen measures that have a positive impact on
               freshwater fisheries and aquaculture, and thus enhance the benefits to all in Cambodia;

         (d) Strategic objective 4: Strengthen the enabling environment for sustainable freshwater
               fisheries and aquaculture.

Many actions identified under the following themes will contribute directly to the achievement of the
strategic objectives relating to freshwater fisheries and aquaculture resources: Protected Areas System
and in situ conservation (Theme 1), Threatened species (Theme 2), Water Resources and wetlands
(Theme 7) bearing in mind that freshwater fisheries and aquaculture are highly dependent on water
resources, Biodiversity and Climate Change (Theme 8), Customary use and traditional knowledge
(Theme 16), and the themes under the enabling environment cluster.

The implementation of actions under the freshwater fisheries and aquaculture theme will contribute
primarily to the achievement of Cambodia Biodiversity Targets 4 and 5 on the sustainable management of
freshwater fisheries and aquaculture, and also to the following Targets: 1 (regarding awareness for the
values, status and trends of marine and coastal biodiversity), 6 (on restoration of ecosystems that have
been under a lot of pressure), 8 (regarding the increase in the surface of fish sanctuaries), and 16 (calling
for the reduction of pollutant pressures on terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems). The improved management

                                                                72
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

and conservation of fisheries resources, as well as the development of sustainable fisheries resources will
contribute to ensuring food security, it will enhance livelihoods and the nations prosperity.
The chances of success are high, which should serve as encouragement to undertake the actions listed
above. Indeed, in Cambodia (i) resources are vast with a wide range of accessible fishing techniques and
technologies, good indigenous technical and environmental knowledge, and a high domestic and
international demand; (ii) there are many examples of the successful application of community-based
management; and (iii) there is a strong history of fish farming in a diversity of forms and levels, and of
good traditional processing skills with low energy requirements.

                                                                73
                                                                                                         National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Table 14: Key actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their implementation under the theme on "Sustainable Freshwater
             Fisheries and Aquaculture"

Strategic Objectives                                                                        Key Actions                                                 Coordinating and
                                                                                                                                                           participating
                                                                                                                                                          ministries and
                                                                                                                                                              agencies

Strategic Objective 1:                                       1.1 Identify and inventory freshwater fisheries and aquaculture and develop                MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                  national fisheries statistics including on abundance of catches and trends at sites.
Identify, inventory, monitor and enhance awareness about                                                                                                MAFF, MOE, MOP,
freshwater resources including fish varieties used in        1.2 Carry out assessments of                                                               GSSD
aquaculture.
                                                                  a. Traditional knowledge and customary protocols relating to fisheries;
                                                                  b. Technology available in fisheries, and also for aquaculture;
                                                                  c. Status and trends of fisheries and aquaculture production; and
                                                                  d. Commercial value of fish varieties.

                                                             1.3 Enhance awareness about the status, trend, value of and threats to fisheries           MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                  and aquaculture resources.

Strategic objective 2:                                       2.1 Assess the impact of the following factors on aquatic resources:                       MAFF, MOE ,GSSD
                                                                2.1.1 Destructive fishing practices;
Identify and describe the major direct and indirect factors                                                                                             MAFF, MOE GSSD
and processes that are negatively impacting Cambodia's          2.1.2 Illegal fishing and over-fishing;
freshwater fisheries and aquaculture; and apply, as                                                                                                     MAFF, MOE,
appropriate, preventive and corrective measures.                2.1.3 Development of dams, irrigation and flood control programs;                       MOWRAM, MRD,
                                                                                                                                                        GSSD

                                                             2.1.4 Invasive alien species;                                                              MAFF, MOE, GSSD

                                                             2.1.5 Insufficient demarcation or lack of demarcation of fishing areas and lack MAFF, GSSD
                                                                     of protection of critical; and

                                                             2.1.6 Shortage of suitable indigenous fish species for aquaculture production. MAFF, GSSD

                      74
                                                 National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

    2.2 Develop and implement management plans.                                       MAFF, MOE, GSSD

    2.3 Demarcate and manage fisheries areas sustainably by establishing              MAFF, MOE, GSSD
            boundaries, ensuring local community participation, revising the burden
            books, and objectively supervising fishing lot operators and controlling
            fishing gear.

    2.4 Develop and implement the fisheries conservation and protection program: MAFF, MOE
            through the development of aquaculture and of a comprehensive commune- MOEYS, TSA, GSSD
            by-commune environmental education program; by placing emphasis on
            protecting and managing natural vegetation as fish habitats and by
            establishing fish sanctuaries; by protecting fish habitats and other fish
            conservation areas, preventing the destruction of flooded forest, which is a
            fish habitat, and preventing fishing in conservation zones.

    2.5 Develop and implement a critical fisheries ecosystem monitoring and           MAFF and MOE,

    protection program to identify and monitor priority areas and establish fish GSSD

    sanctuaries.

    2.6 Implement the Community Fisheries Development: Community-based                MAFF, GSSD, MOE
            fisheries management program, and include staff training, manual
            development and budgetary support.

    2.7 Implement the Tonle Sap Great Lake Floodplain integrated management           MAFF, MOE TSA,
            program, including land-use planning, resource zonation, community        GSSD
            development, small scale industrial development, fish and agriculture
            products processing, and the involvement of local authorities.

    2.8 Further develop aquaculture: Indigenous fish aquaculture development          MAFF, GSSD
            project (including the promotion of native fish production) and expand
            aquaculture, having in mind the 15% annual increase targeted in the
            Strategic Planning Framework 2010-2019 for Fisheries ­ Cambodia to
            reach 185,000 tonnes per year by 2019.

    2.9 Expand rice field fisheries, having in mind the 15% annual increase           MAFF, GSSD
            targeted in the Strategic Planning Framework 2010-2019 for Fisheries ­
            Cambodia to reach 500,000 tonnes per year by 2019.

75
                                                          National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                                          2.10 Restore/rehabilitate degraded or lost inland waters.                        MAFF, GSSD

                                                          2.11 Promote traditional knowledge and customary sustainable use.                MAFF, MOE MRD,
                                                                                                                                           GSSD

                                                          2.12 Modernize fisheries (modernization of the traditional systems of extensive MAFF, TSA, GSSD
                                                                  resource use).

                                                          2.13 Reduce pressure on the wild fisheries resource through livelihood           MAFF, GSSD
                                                                  diversification.

                                                          2.14 Protect the wetlands ecosystem from the effects of deforestation, land      MAFF, MOE GSSD
                                                                  conversion and pollution.

                                                          2.15 Improve the post-harvest fish processing, and promote national markets and MAFF, TSA GSSD
                                                                  export of harvested fish and processed fish.

                                                          2.16 Address endangered species (see detailed actions under theme 2 above).      MAFF, MOE GSSD

Strategic objective 3:                                    3.1 Support protected areas and conservation areas, including by stopping        MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                 fishing in those areas.
Maintain or strengthen measures that have a positive                                                                                       MAFF, MOE, MRD,
impact on freshwater fisheries and aquaculture, and thus  3.2 Apply customary sustainable use practices.                                   GSSD
enhance the benefits to all in Cambodia.                                                                                                   MAFF, GSSD
                                                                                                                                           MAFF, MRD, GSSD
Strategic objective 4:                                    4.1 Formulate a national sustainable fishery policy and action plan.
                                                                                                                                           MAFF, GSSD
Strengthen the enabling environment for sustainable       4.2 Empower local communities and the private sector, including community
freshwater fisheries and aquaculture.                           fisheries, aquaculturists, and fish processors in order to develop and
                                                                sustainably manage fisheries resources.

                                                          4.3 Ensure land security for the protection and growth of the fisheries sector.

                                                          4.4 Improve the livelihoods of poor people by enhancing their capacity to use    MAFF, GSSD
                                                                fish resources more effectively after capture in order to add value.

                                                     76
                                                                 National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

    4.5 Promote and support research and international cooperation, particularly     MAFF, MOEYS,
          with the FAO and other United Nations organisations and programmes, as     GSSD, MOE
          well as international research organizations dealing with fisheries and
          aquaculture.

    4.6 Strengthen cooperation in the context of the implementation of the CBD, the  MAFF, MOE, GSSD
          Ramsar Convention, the Convention on International Trade in Endangered
          Species of Wild Flora and Fauna (CITES) and the Convention on Migratory
          Species (CMS).

    4.7 Strengthen cooperation within the country and regionally/trans-boundary      MAFF, MOE, GSSD
          (Mekong Basin) in order to exchange experiences and expertise and better
          coordinate and complement resources.

    4.8 Ensure sustainable access to fisheries resources for poor rural communities  MAFF, MOE, TSA,
          through fisheries reform.                                                  GSSD

    4.9 Mobilize financial resources including for law enforcement.                  MAFF, MOE, GSSD

    4.10 Develop and implement a communication, education and awareness-raising      MAFF, MOE
          strategy and promote, in particular, sustainable fishery practices on the  MOEYS, GSSD
          national and local levels of government and in communities.

    4.11 Develop fishery institutions and their infrastructure.                      MAFF, GSSD

    4.12 Integrate the need for sustainable fisheries in development, sectoral and   MAFF, MOE, GSSD
          intersectoral strategies, and plans.

    4.13 Develop and implement monitoring, evaluations and reporting programmes. MAFF, TSA, GSSD

77
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

               Theme 11: Sustainable Coastal and Marine Resources Management

1. Background

Cambodias 435 km of coastal area and 500,000 km2 marine Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) constitute
ecologically and biologically rich areas where some of the well-known threatened marine mammals such
as the dugong, marine dolphins and whales, and marine turtles and molluscs can be found.

At the time of the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, reliable information on the status of fish stocks was not
available. However, it was known that the fishing zones closest to the shore were overharvested by artisan
fishers lacking the capacity to sail into higher seas and that there was a lot of illegal fishing through the
use of illegal fishing gears and in the off-season. Mangroves were severely affected by wood harvesting
for charcoal production and other uses, urbanization and other development work, and intensive shrimp
aquaculture. Coral reefs and seagrass beds that are highly critical to marine productivity were also
threatened by offshore oil and gas exploitation and the associated pollution. Many watersheds were
degraded and coastal zones eroded or polluted by oil spills and other human activities. The capacity of the
Fisheries Administration, then Department of Fisheries, in preventing illegal fishing, and monitoring the
marine and coastal resources was limited by a lack of technical capacity, inadequate equipment and
budget constraints.

Thus the objectives and actions put forward in the 2002 NBSAP focused on monitoring the status of
marine species and their habitats, on setting up a Monitoring Surveillance and Control (MSC) Plan for
industrial fishing and developing one for artisan fishery, on protecting coastal zones in particular the
mangroves; and on improving the technical capacity of the Department of Fisheries.

Significant progress was made on all the objectives and actions adopted in the 2002 NBSAP. For
example:

         (a) Pollution by oil spills, overfishing in the coastal areas, use of illegal fishing gears and fishing
               out of season were significantly reduced over the years;

         (b) Watershed and mangroves areas requiring protection or restoration have been identified and
               protected, while many degraded mangroves are undergoing replanting. In fact, Cambodia
               undertook a wide initiative of habitat protection, also taking climate change into account,
               through the designation and protection of important habitats including mangrove, sea grass,
               fish conservation areas and coral reef, and some other important aquatic habitats. Cambodia
               used community-based approaches and included the marine species under the sub-decree on
               aquatic endangered species (also see theme 2 above on threatened species);

         (c) Cambodia also undertook a number of capacity building projects, including training of
               personnel in coastal zone management techniques, education programs on climate change
               and adaptation in the coastal area to help the communities adapt to the climate change, as
               well as better understanding the value of biodiversity in adapting to or mitigating greenhouse
               gas (GHG) emissions through mangrove restoration, for example. Training was also provided
               to the local community on patrolling and the sustainable use of marine and coastal resources28.

         (d) In 2005, the Government promulgated a Sub-decree on Community Fisheries and other
               relevant instruments: the 2005 fisheries policy statement and 2006 Fisheries Law to
               strengthen community-based development of fisheries sector, sustainable use and
               management of areas released from fishing concession, enhancement of natural fish stock,
               protection of fish sanctuaries and endangered aquatic species29;

         (e) Also, the Government undertook to create an integrated coastal zone management system
               with support from the Government of Denmark30;

         (f) Mariculture systems were encouraged to ensure a sustainable fish supply and avoid
               threatening some fish species. The 2006 Law on Fisheries made general provisions on
               mariculture authorizations.

2. Issues

Despite the progress made since 2002, there are still many issues relating to coastal and marine resources:

         (a) Inadequate information on fish stocks, and on marine and coastal resources in general;

                                                                78
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

         (b) Knowledge gaps and lack of scientific information regarding the description of areas
               meeting the ecologically or biologically significant areas (EBSA) criteria, vulnerable marine
               ecosystems (VME) and particularly sensitive sea areas (PSSA);

         (c) Watershed degradation;

         (d) Coastal erosion and depletion of mangroves;

         (e) Climate change;

         (f) Invasive alien species;

         (g) Over-harvesting of high value marine and coastal resources and fishing out of season;

         (h) Use of illegal fishing gears and by-catch of non-target or protected species;

         (i) Pollution caused by oil spills and other human activities that can result in physical damage,
               non-physical disturbances or biological disturbance;

         (j) Weak management, surveillance and enforcement capacity of the Department of Fisheries;

         (k) Non-sustainable coastal aquaculture;

         (l) Lack of a trans-boundary fishery management body between Cambodia and Thailand;

         (m) No assessment of abundance of marine mammals, sea grass and coral reefs;

         (n) Lack of marine mammal stranding network to rescue stranded animals;

         (o) Lack of regulation to manage marine ecotourism activities at a number of sea grass and

         (p) coral reef areas;

         (q) Local fishers limited understanding of relevant legislations concerning conservation and
               management of aquatic fishery resources.

3. Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues

         (a) Strategic objective 1: Identify, inventory, monitor and enhance awareness about coastal and
               marine resources.

         (b) Strategic objective 2: Identify and describe the direct and indirect factors and processes that
               are negatively impacting Cambodias coastal and marine resources; and apply, as
               appropriate, preventive and corrective measures

         (c) Strategic objective 3: Maintain or strengthen measures that have a positive impact on coastal
               and marine resources and thus enhance the benefits from coastal and marine resources to all
               in Cambodia

         (d) Strategic objective 4: Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation of the
               strategic objectives and actions identified for coastal and marine resources.

Many actions identified under the following themes will contribute directly to the achievement of the
strategic objectives relating to marine and coastal resources: Protected Areas System and in situ
conservation (Theme 1), Threatened species (Theme 2), Water Resources and wetlands (Theme 7),
Biodiversity and Climate Change (Theme 8), Forest Resources in particular mangroves (Theme 9),
Customary use and traditional knowledge (Theme 16), and the themes under the enabling environment
cluster.

The implementation of actions under the marine and coastal resources theme will contribute to the
achievement of Cambodia Biodiversity Targets 1 (regarding awareness for the values, status and trends of
marine and coastal biodiversity), 8 (regarding the doubling of the coverage of marine and coastal protected
areas), 15 (on the reduction of anthropogenic pressures on coral reefs and vulnerable ecosystems impacted
by climate change), and 16 (calling for the reduction of pollutant pressures on terrestrial and aquatic
ecosystems).

                                                                79
                                                                         National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Table 15: Key actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their implementation under the theme on "Sustainable Coastal and
             Marine Resources Management"

Strategic Objectives                                        Key Actions                                                                        Coordinating and
                                                                                                                                                  participating
                                                                                                                                                 ministries and
                                                                                                                                                     agencies

Strategic objective 1:                                      1.1 Identify components of marine and coastal ecosystems which are critical        MAFF, MOE, MOP,
                                                                  to the functioning of the ecosystems and important for sustainable           GSSD
Identify, inventory, monitor and enhance awareness about          development and poverty eradication. In particular, conduct
coastal and marine resources.                                     comprehensive national assessments, including retrospective analyses, of
                                                                  fisheries, both commercial fisheries as well as small-scale fisheries, to
                                                                  determine the level of unsustainable fishing practices;

                                                            1.2 Identify marine and coastal areas meeting the ecologically or biologically     MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                  significant areas (EBSA) criteria, within and, if possible, beyond national
                                                                  jurisdiction, and vulnerable marine ecosystems (VME) and particularly
                                                                  sensitive sea areas (PSSA)

                                                            1.3 Carry out an assessment of the status and value of marine and coastal          MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                  biodiversity in relation to the types and levels of human activity in areas
                                                                  described as meeting the EBSA criteria, taking into account traditional
                                                                  knowledge

                                                            1.4 Regarding coral reefs,                                                         MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                  (a) Map and assess the vulnerability of coral reefs;
                                                                  (b) Carry out research on resilience and resistance to bleaching and
                                                                        raised temperature; and
                                                                  (c) Analyze the status and trends of coral-reef ecosystems, as well as the
                                                                        ecological and socio-economic impacts of coral-reef degradation and
                                                                        destruction

                                                            1.5 Enhance awareness about the status, trends, value of and threats to marine MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                  and coastal resources across the government and society

Strategic objective 2:                                      2.1 Gather information on the physical degradation and destruction of key          MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                 marine and coastal habitats and assess their biological and socio-
Identify and describe the direct and indirect factors and        economic consequences
processes that are negatively impacting Cambodia's coastal

                      80
                                                                                                                National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

and marine resources; and apply, as appropriate, preventive  2.2 Develop and implement management practices, methodologies and                  MAFF, MOE, GSSD
and corrective measures                                           policies, including in particular restoration of mangroves and
                                                                  rehabilitation of damaged coral, to reduce and mitigate the impacts of
                                                                  physical degradation and destruction of key marine and coastal habitats on
                                                                  the provision of services from marine and coastal ecosystems.

                                                             2.3 Protect mangrove forests through adequate land-use plans, and local            MOE, MAFF,
                                                                  community involvement                                                         MLMUPC, GSSD

                                                             2.4 Undertake direct action to protect the marine and coastal environment          MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                  from negative impacts by prioritizing ecologically or biologically
                                                                  significant areas

                                                             2.5 Establish and maintain marine and coastal protected areas that are             MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                  representative, effectively managed, ecologically based, and well
                                                                  connected and integrated in the wider land- and seascape

                                                             2.6 Develop monitoring and management programs for target fish species             MAFF, GSSD

                                                             2.7 Develop a full Monitoring Surveillance and Control (MSC) Plan for              MAFF, MOE, GSSD

                                                             industrial fishing and establishment of a working pilot scheme for MSC of

                                                             artisan fishery, including awareness and training

                                                             2.8 Control, under national jurisdiction, activities and processes that may        MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                  have significant adverse impacts on deep seabed ecosystems and species
                                                                  beyond the limits of national jurisdiction, in order to address Article 3 of
                                                                  the Convention on Biological Diversity

                                                             2.9 Undertake actions to reduce and control sea-based sources of pollution         MAFF, MOE, GSSD

                                                             2.10 Achieve substantial progress in protecting the marine environment from        MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                    land-based activities through effective application of the Global
                                                                    Programme of Action for the Protection of the Marine Environment from
                                                                    Land-based Activities

                                                             2.11 Develop national coral reef action plans and programmes mobilizing            MAFF, MOE, GSSD

                                                             inter-agency and cross-sectoral partnerships, as well as close coordination

81
                                                                National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                                                among national and subnational governments and local communities to
                                                                address the multiple anthropogenic pressures on coral reefs, taking into
                                                                account actions under other relevant themes, such as on fisheries or on climate

                                                                2.12 Prevent or minimize the negative impacts of mariculture on marine and         MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                       coastal biodiversity and enhance any positive effects of using native
                                                                       species.

                                                                2.13 Prevent the introduction of invasive alien species into the marine and        MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                       coastal environment, and eradicate, to the extent possible, those invasive
                                                                       alien species that have already been introduced.

                                                                2.14 Promote community-based measures to manage fisheries sustainably              MAFF, MOE, GSSD

                                                                2.15 Identify and implement management measures for multispecies reef              MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                       fisheries to reduce unsustainable fishing practices;

                                                                2.16 Sustainably manage populations of key reef fish and invertebrate species MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                       targeted by export-driven fisheries

                                                                2.17 Strengthen regional and international cooperation to address issues related MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                       to the management of marine resources and ecosystems.

Strategic objective 3:                                          3.1 Improve management effectiveness of established protected and                  MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                     conservation marine and coastal areas.                                        MAFF, MOE GSSD
Maintain or strengthen measures that have a positive impact
on coastal and marine resources and thus enhance the            3.2 Restore to and maintain fisheries stocks at sustainable levels
benefits from coastal and marine resources to all in Cambodia

Strategic objective 4:                                          4.1 Assemble a database on marine and coastal biodiversity status and trends,      MAFF, MOE, MRD,
                                                                     threats, and management, and make it widely accessible in the national        GSSD
Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation           clearing-house mechanism
of the strategic objectives and actions identified for coastal                                                                                     MAFF, MOE, MRD,
and marine resources.                                           4.2 Strengthen collaboration and harmonize initiatives with activities under       GSSD
                                                                     other relevant conventions and organizations.

82
                    National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

    4.3 Within the framework of integrated marine and coastal area management         MAFF, MOE, MRD,
         (IMCAM), integrate biodiversity concerns in all socio-economic sectors       GSSD
         that impact the marine and coastal environment

    4.4 Update and strengthen existing legislation, as well as institutions dealing   MAFF, MOE, MRD,
         with marine and coastal issues                                               GSSD

    4.5 Introduce new or strengthen existing national regulations and management      MAFF, MOE, MRD,
         measures, including the application of the ecosystem approach to fisheries   GSSD
         to address unsustainable fishing practices, such as overfishing, illegal,
         unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing and destructive fishing practices,
         and ensure effective enforcement;

    4.6 Strengthen capacity in marine science, research, information and              MAFF, MOE, MRD,
         management, technology transfer and acquisition, through education, other    GSSD
         types of training, and public awareness, to improve implementation of the
         actions under this theme

    4.7 Capacity-building and training program for staff on coral reefs               MAFF, MOE, GSSD

    4.8 Provision of patrol boats to Department of Fisheries                          MAFF, GSSD

    4.9 Identify diverse funding mechanisms and mobilize financial resources for MAFF, MOE, MRD,

    implementation                                                                    GSSD

    4.10 Create alternative sources of livelihood for local fishing communities, so MOE, GSSD, MAFF
          as to reduce pressures on marine resources

83
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

              Theme 12: Sustainable Animal and Wildlife Resources Management

1. Background

Cambodia is host to a great diversity of animal and wildlife of significant importance in the lives of the
people and for the functioning of ecosystems. The 2002 Forestry Law states that all wildlife species
are state property and components of forest resources, including the mammals, birds, reptiles,
amphibians, insects, other invertebrates, and their eggs or off spring. Wildlife management, research and
conservation are administered under the General Secretariat for Sustainable Development (GSSD) of the
National Council for Sustainable Development (NCSD), the General Directorate of Administration for
Nature Conservation and Protected (GDANCP) of Ministry of Environment, and the Forestry
Administration. The Department of Biodiversity of GSSD and the Department of Wildlife and Biodiversity
in the Forestry Administration are jointly responsible for developing biodiversity conservation and wildlife
management plans, as well as ecological monitoring, surveying, and research.

At the time of the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, the primary issues affecting animal and wildlife
resources in the country were (i) the threat to their survival from illegal hunting and trade,
overexploitation, habitat destruction and degradation, pollution and invasive alien species, and (ii) the
limited information available regarding their status.

The strategic objectives and priority actions for animal and wildlife resources were articulated around the
reduction of illegal hunting and trade through awareness campaigns, the reduction of the impact of
invasive alien species, monitoring of the status and exploitation levels of wildlife, and development of
management plans for commercial animals and wildlife species. Each of those actions is on-going and
some progress has been made in achieving the objectives that were established, but much remains to be
accomplished. Indeed, the status of wildlife is available, but it requires updating; illegal hunting has been
reduced, but its incidence continues to remain too high; and invasive alien species have been identified,
but the resources required to control the impacts of those species effectively are insufficient.

In order to conserve and protect some landmark species of flora and fauna, additional production forest
areas have been designated, including 12 Protected Forests and 8 Biodiversity Conservation Areas. Of the
23 Protected Areas under the MOE, 10 are Wildlife Sanctuaries. Local communities are involved in in-
situ conservation of animal and wildlife and local villagers cooperate in projects.

With regard to ex-situ conservation, the government administered "Wildlife Rescue Centre" located
within the Phnom Tamao Zoological Park confiscates wildlife that has been illegally traded in the
country. Other ex-situ wildlife management centres include the Prey Angkor Zoo (private), the Angkor
Centre for Conservation Biology (private), the Wildlife Development Centre in Kampot province
(private) and Koh Kong Safari World, each of which has been developed by the private sector.

Cambodia is also involved in trans-boundary biodiversity conservation. In recognition that wildlife freely
crosses national boundaries and moves from one country to another along neighboring borders, Cambodia
participates in the conservation of biological resources through the implementation of the ITTO Trans-
boundary Biodiversity Conservation project, the ADB Biodiversity Corridors Initiative and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations Wildlife Enforcement Network.

2. Issues

The primary issues regarding the current status of animal and wildlife resources in Cambodia include:

         (a) The lack of detailed and updated information on the status and trends of, and threats to,
               wildlife because of inadequate technology and limited human and financial resources
               required for monitoring. Some development partners, environmental NGOs and a few
               research institutions continue to gather that information, but on a limited scale;

         (b) Conservation and degradation of wildlife habitats caused by the demand for timber,

         (c) especially luxury species of high-priced timber, unsustainable extraction of non-timber forest
               products, land cleared for plantation crops and agriculture, road constructions and other
               public works increased access to wild lands, urban expansion, mining, and pollution;

         (d) Illegal and unsustainable hunting and fishing. The scale of Cambodias illegal wildlife trade
               is substantial, driven by international demand for meat and traditional medicines in
               neighboring countries. The trade leaves areas of apparently "healthy" forest devoid of

                                                                84
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

               wildlife, with significant populations of many species surviving only in extremely remote
               areas or those protected by intensive conservation measures;
         (e) There is no specific legislation to address invasive alien species (IAS) issues, as well as
               limited information and human and financial capacity to address those issues that are
               associated with invasive alien species.
3. Strategic objectives
The following strategic objectives were adopted to address these issues:
         (a) Strategic objective 1: Identify, inventory, monitor and enhance awareness of animal and
               wildlife resources.
         (b) Strategic objective 2: Identify and describe the direct and indirect factors and processes that
               are impacting Cambodias animal and wildlife resources and apply, as appropriate,
               preventive and corrective measures.
         (c) Strategic objective 3: Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation of the
               actions identified for the conservation and sustainable use of animal and wildlife resources.
Implementation of actions identified under this theme will benefit from actions to be undertaken under
several other themes, as well, in particular Theme 1 on protected areas system and in situ conservation;
Theme 2 on threatened species; Theme 3 on ex-situ conservation; and a number of other themes,
including those on water resources and wetlands (Theme 7); biodiversity and climate change (Theme 8);
land-use planning (Theme 6); forest resources (Theme 9); customary use and traditional knowledge
(Theme 16); as well as those relating to the enabling environment. The implementation of these actions
will also contribute to the achievement of Cambodia Biodiversity Targets on awareness-raising (Theme
1), identification of threatened species and improving their status (Theme 10) and halving the rate of loss
of natural habitats and reducing habitat fragmentation and degradation, over harvesting and the
introduction of invasive alien species and their impacts (Theme 12).

                                                                85
                                                                          National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Table 16: Key actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their implementation under the theme on "Sustainable Animal and
             Wildlife Resources Management"

Strategic Objectives                                         Key Actions                                                                         Coordinating and
                                                                                                                                                    participating

                                                                                                                                              ministries and agencies

Strategic Objective 1:                                       1.1. Continue taxonomic and ecological studies on animal and wildlife, and       MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                  consolidate the available information on animal and wildlife in databases
Identify, inventory, monitor and enhance awareness of             and through the national clearing-house mechanism.
animal and wildlife resources.

                                                             1.2. Identify animal and wildlife resources and assess their values, status and  MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                  trends, and manage and share that information in user-friendly databases
                                                                  as well as through the national clearing-house mechanism.

                                                             1.3. Assess the current status of invasive alien species impacting animals and MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                  wildlife in the country.

                                                             1.4. Develop a national monitoring program and associated database on            MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                  invasive alien species.

                                                             1.5. Enhance awareness of the status, trends, values of, and threats to animal MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                  and wildlife resources.

Strategic Objective 2:                                       2.1 Undertake national campaigns against illegal hunting.                        MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                                                                                              MAFF, MOE, GSSD
Identify and describe the direct and indirect factors and    2.2 Undertake national behavior change campaigns to reduce demand for
processes that are impacting Cambodia's animal and wildlife       bushmeat among the urban middle and upper classes.                          MAFF, MOE, GSSD
resources and apply, as appropriate, preventive and
corrective measures.                                         2.3 Establish additional national parks, wildlife reserves, wildlife rescue
                                                                  centers and zoos, and restore wildlife habitats that have been degraded.

                                                             2.4 Develop alternatives to bushmeat, for example through animal                 MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                  domestication and breeding.

                                                             2.5 Ensure effective site-based protection through improved law enforcement MAFF, MOE, GSSD

                                                       86
                                                                                                           National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                                                and patrolling in protected areas system.

                                                                2.6 Establish informant networks against illegal poaching around critical       MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                     protected areas.

                                                                2.7 Increase support for law enforcement efforts in areas already protected     MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                     through additional human and financial capacities, and enhance
                                                                     collaboration with local communities, indigenous ethnic minorities and
                                                                     development partners, as well as natural resource management and
                                                                     environmental NGOs.

Strategic Objective 3:                                          3.1 Develop and implement awareness-raising programmes and a national           MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                     strategy for Invasive Alien Species management.                            MAFF, MOE, GSSD
Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation
of the actions identified for the conservation and sustainable  3.2 Coordinate work with government institutions, civil societies, the private
use of animal and wildlife resources.                                sector and wildlife conservation organizations to increase efficiency and
                                                                     synergies while avoiding unnecessary duplication of effort, and engage
                                                                     local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities to strengthen their
                                                                     roles in land-use planning and ecosystem management.

                                                                3.3 Update legislation/regulations and ensure their effective enforcement.      MAFF, MOE, GSSD

                                                                3.4 Enhance implementation of CITES related provisions in the relevant          MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                     national laws                                                              MAFF, MOE, GSSD

                                                                3.5 Mobilize funds for wildlife conservation and sustainable use exploring
                                                                     diverse sources of financing, including REDD+ and ecotourism.

87
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                    Theme 13: Sustainable Agriculture and Animal Production

1. Background

At the time of the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, Cambodias economy was largely based on agriculture,
mostly rice-based rain-fed and mono-cropped systems. Shifting cultivation, commercial crops planting,
home gardens and perennial systems were also practiced. Agriculture employed most of the labor force.
Cambodian agriculture depended largely on traditional cultivars of rice, maize, sesame, vegetables and
sweet potato. New pests and pathogens have contributed significantly to the loss of land race diversity in
the absence of gene banks and storage facilities. Loss of crop genetic diversity and land races, together
with the improper use of pesticides and chemical fertilizers, were seriously compromising the countrys
food security.

Animal production was still limited but a shift was taking place from village level to commercial level
production, and with the introduction, following other countries in Asia, of new genes in domesticated
animals to boost production. However, the application of adequate husbandry techniques, sanitary
measures and quality control were limited.

The challenges that Cambodia faced included the fact that: a lot of land needed to be cleared for
agriculture; cropping/farming systems (in particular the use of soil and water polluting chemical
fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides, the inadequacy of slash-and-burn cropping and mono-cropping and
uncontrolled grazing) were not the most appropriate to respond to the food needs and food security in the
country; and husbandry techniques and sanitary measures for livestock production were deficient.

When developing the 2002 NBSAP, Cambodia focused on agricultural biodiversity, which is a broad
term that includes all components of biological diversity of relevance to food and agriculture, and all
components of biological diversity that constitute the agricultural ecosystems, also named agro-
ecosystems: the variety and variability of animals, plants and micro-organisms, at the genetic, species and
ecosystem levels, which are necessary to sustain key functions of the agro-ecosystem, its structure and
processes. Agricultural biodiversity provides not only food and income but also raw materials for
clothing, shelter and medicines, and performs other services such as maintenance of soil fertility and
biota, and soil and water conservation, all of which are essential to human well-being. Agricultural
biodiversity is the outcome of the interactions among genetic resources, the environment and the
management systems and practices used by farmers. It is the result of both natural selection and human
inventive developments over millennia.

Strategically, Cambodia decided to focus its objectives and actions for the decade on:

         (a) The protection of agricultural land, and plant and livestock resources, including through
               Integrated Pest Management program;

         (b) Promoting agricultural biodiversity program for food security;

         (c) The training of farmers, livestock producers and fish growers on improved farming systems
               respectful of the environment, including for example mixed cropping, rotational agriculture
               and pastoral rotational grazing, the use of chemical and organic fertilizers and pesticide,
               water use in agriculture, and animal husbandry;

         (d) Strengthening research in new and alternative crops.

Following the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, agricultural production increased remarkably in spite of
unpredictable weather conditions. The livestock production also increased, but only slightly, and its
contribution to the economy remained stagnant. This sub-sector needed to grow in order to meet local
nutrition needs and to serve the tourism industry. Introduction and propagation of high yielding species
and expanded veterinary services is a priority of MAFF.

To promote agricultural production, MAFF prepared laws and regulations including on the Sanitary and
Phyto-sanitary Agreement, the Law on Production and Animal health, the 2012 Law on Management of
Pesticide and Agricultural Fertilizer, and Law on the Management and Use of Agricultural Land. The
enhancement of the agriculture sector is one of the four priority programme areas of the Rectangular
Strategy and the 2009 National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) 2009-2013 which is also the
countrys poverty reduction strategy, and the Green Growth Roadmap. The 2005 Agricultural Sector
Strategic Development Plan 2009-2013 and the 2006-2010 Strategy for Agriculture and Water are both

                                                                88
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

aligned with the Governments Rectangular Strategy for Growth, Employment, Equity and Efficiency in
Cambodia and efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. The overarching intent of the
Agricultural Sector Strategic Development Plan is to enhance agricultural productivity, diversification
and commercialization in order to reduce poverty and promote economic growth alongside sustainable
natural resource management. The Governments agricultural strategy promotes diversified farming
systems, agro-forestry and protection, and the management of critical watersheds. Those strategies and
their link to the maintenance of protected areas and biodiversity are considered critical to maintaining
stability in agricultural systems and in ensuring food security. The significant contribution of protected
areas to the supply and regulation of water for agriculture is recognized.

The issues observed in 2002 are still present, although progress can be noted on some of them: slash and
burn cultivation is reduced, and the cooperation between agencies has improved. However, no study has
been reported regarding genetic erosion.

Regarding implementation of the priority actions, MAFF undertook a number of programmes to address the issues:

         (a) MAFF conducted several farmers' training programmes on improved cultivation and
               livestock production systems respectful of the environment. MAFF also strengthened
               agricultural extension service delivery in a more broadened and comprehensive fashion in
               order to bring about a wider uptake of better cultivation techniques and effective practices on
               soil fertility management, plant protection, use and maintenance of agricultural machinery,
               postharvest and storage technology. The Integrated Pest Management (IPM) training
               programme, for example, led to the reduction of ecology disruption and environmental
               contamination, to the reduction of public health and toxic residues in food, and to an
               improvement in the livelihood of farmers, biodiversity and marketability of produce31.
               MAFF established a Plant Protection Office under the Department of Agronomy and Soil
               Improvement, in response to Article 4 of the International Plant Protection Convention
               (IPPC) that requires contracting parties to develop National Plant Protection Organisation32.

         (b) MAFF prepared an "Agriculture Sector Strategic Development Plan: 2006-2010" in October
               2005 in order to achieve RGCs strategic goals as well as the NSDP 2006-2010 to promote
               agricultural diversity and agricultural productivity for domestic and external demands, and
               for the countrys food security. A Strategy for Agriculture and Water Sectors was also
               adopted in 200733. The sustainability of agriculture is closely linked to the supply of water.
               Thus, the government should encourage its policy on the improvement of the irrigation
               systems through restoring the existing irrigation systems and building new ones to ensure
               there is sufficient water for farmers. These policies promote pro-poor agricultural systems
               and community arrangements, effective agro-business development, efficient, sustainable
               and pro-poor management of land and water resources.

         (c) In the Green Growth Roadmap, it is recognized that agricultural productivity can be
               promoted and maintained in the longer term if organic agricultural practices are promoted to
               delay the degradation of arable lands. Sectoral diversification can be supported by increased
               capacity building, Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET), and other
               initiatives by the Ministry of Labor and Vocational Training (MOLVT), and the Ministry of
               Education, Youth and Sports (MOEYS). If organic farming is promoted in rural areas and
               the production can be connected to the main markets, Cambodia can have the potential to
               become the hub for organic rice in Southeast Asia. Such capital inflow would spur private
               sector growth, create additional employment opportunities, and benefit international
               marketability and competitiveness of Cambodian products as a whole.

         (d) MAFF conducted agricultural lands inventories, soil surveys and agricultural land-use
               assessments throughout the country. It generated data and information relevant for planning
               for agricultural intensification and diversification and sustainable agriculture34.

         (e) Research on new and alternative crops has also been strengthened35;

The Government is conscious about the following challenges:

         (a) The preservation of ecosystems with a high productivity and rich biodiversity is the primary
               condition for sustainable yields of renewable raw materials and products such as food crops,
               livestock, timber, and fish;

                                                                89
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

         (b) The productivity in rice and other crops; access to extension services, credit and inputs;
               irrigation; ensuring better benefits for farmers through marketing; limited farmers
               knowledge in using agricultural inputs, techniques and soil improvement management;

         (c) Competency in law enforcement to monitor and regulate agricultural inputs and soil
               resources and soil fertility management;

         (d) The use of land and other resources, as well as private sector investments and participation;
         (e) The formation of farmers so as to improve their effectiveness and partnering with private

               sector; and
         (f) The impact of climate change and natural disasters.

Some attention needs to be paid to invasive alien species and the following recommendations from the 4th
edition of the Global Biodiversity Outlook of particular relevance:

         (a) Agriculture should be made more efficient, including through improved targeting and
               efficiency of fertilizer, pesticide and water use, reducing post-harvest losses, minimizing
               food waste, and promoting sustainable diets;

         (b) Nutrient pollution should be reduced by improving nutrient use efficiency in agriculture to
               reduce losses to the environment, enhancing treatment and recycling of sewage and
               industrial waste water, eliminating phosphates from detergents and the conservation and
               restoration of wetlands;

         (c) Efforts should be increased to identify and control the main pathways responsible for species
               invasions, including through the development of border control or quarantine measures to
               reduce the likelihood of potentially invasive alien species being introduced, and making full
               use of risk analysis and international standards;

         (d) The conservation of the wild relatives of domesticated crops and livestock should be
               integrated into management plans for protected areas. Surveys of the location of wild
               relatives should be conducted and this information included in plans for the expansion or
               development of protected area networks.

2. Issues

The following key issues were identified:

         (a) Land clearance/land-use (loss of agriculture land);

         (b) Soil and water pollution by excessive chemical fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides;

         (c) Mono-cropping;

         (d) Industrial cropping;

         (e) Genetic erosion (fewer variety);

         (f) Overgrazing;

         (g) Negative impact of agriculture in some areas (due to water pollution from excessive use of
               chemical inputs);

         (h) Lack of or limited cooperation between agencies;

         (i) Limited investment in technology and other inputs;

         (j) Limited laws and regulations enforcement;

         (k) Limited integration into wider development plans, thus increased chances of conflicts with
               other development plans;

         (l) Deficient husbandry techniques and sanitary measures for livestock production; and

         (m) Climate change, natural disasters and invasive alien species.

3. Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues

         (a) Strategic objective 1: Identify, inventory, monitor and enhance awareness about agricultural
               biodiversity, including the animal component;

                                                                90
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

         (b) Strategic objective 2: Address the direct and indirect factors and processes that are
               negatively impacting Cambodias agricultural biodiversity and are therefore impacting
               agricultural and animal production; and apply, as appropriate, preventive and corrective
               measures;

         (c) Strategic objective 3: Maintain or strengthen measures that have a positive impact on
               agriculture and animal production and thus ensure food security for all, particularly for the
               rural community;

         (d) Strategic objective 4: Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation of the
               strategic objectives and actions for sustainable agriculture and animal production.

The implementation of the actions under these strategic objectives will greatly contribute to the
achievement of the Cambodia Biodiversity Targets 1 (on awareness-raising), 5 (on sustainable
management of areas under agriculture and animal production) and 6 (on restoration of agricultural lands
and recovery of their ecosystem services important to all, particularly local communities and women, the
elderly and children of indigenous ethnic minorities). Implementation of the actions listed in Table 17
below and the Cambodia Biodiversity Targets relating to agriculture should have in mind that in the
NSDS (2009),

         (a) The ultimate objectives of the recommended actions are (i) to generate productive soils with
               high organic content, (ii) to prevent land deterioration due to erosion or loss of nutrients, (iii)
               avoid accumulation of pesticides and heavy metals, (iv) a rich biodiversity found within
               varied biotopes in the landscape, and (v) sustainable agricultural practices;

         (b) The following NSDS targets for 2015 are yet to be met: (i) Target B: Achieve, by 2015, an
               increase of the national rice yield to 2.4 t/ha and 50% increase of non-agriculture income
               generating activities in rural areas; (ii) Target C: Achieve, by 2015, sustainable agricultural
               practices (IPM or organic agriculture) in 20% of the agricultural land; and (iii) Target D:
               Achieve, by 2015, sustainable land-use planning in 50% of the provinces.

                                                                91
                                                                         National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Table 17: Key actions36 and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their implementation under the theme on "Sustainable Agriculture
             and Animal Production"

Strategic Objectives                                        Key Actions                                                                        Coordinating and
                                                                                                                                                  participating
                                                                                                                                                 ministries and
                                                                                                                                                     agencies

Strategic objective 1:                                      1.1 Provide a comprehensive assessment of the coverage of agricultural             MAFF, GSSD
                                                                  land; of the status, trends and value of agricultural biodiversity; and the
Identify, inventory, monitor and enhance awareness about          types of management in Cambodia;
agricultural biodiversity, including the animal component.

                                                            1.2 Assess the associated knowledge, innovations and practices of                  MAFF, GSSD
                                                                  indigenous ethnic minorities and local communities in sustaining
                                                                  agricultural biodiversity and agro-ecosystem services;

                                                            1.3 Promote public awareness of the goods and services provided by                 MAFF, GSSD
                                                                  agricultural biodiversity, and the value and importance of such diversity
                                                                  for food, agriculture and animal production;

                                                            1.4 Enhance capacity to sustain livelihoods by expanding knowledge, and            MAFF, MOEYS,
                                                                  understanding and awareness of the multiple goods and services               GSSD, MOE
                                                                  provided by the different levels and functions of agricultural
                                                                  biodiversity.

Strategic objective 2:                                      2.1. Support research that will determine the most appropriate                     MAFF, GSSD,
                                                                  farming/cropping systems for the various ecosystems in Cambodia,             MOEYS, MOE
Address the direct and indirect factors and processes that        addressing essentially:
are negatively impacting Cambodia's agricultural                  a. Irregularity and, at times, insufficiency of rain waters in rain-fed
biodiversity and are therefore impacting agricultural and               agriculture;
animal production; and apply, as appropriate, preventive          b. Uses of chemical fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides;
and corrective measures                                           c. Agricultural land protection and land-use program;
                                                                  d. Agricultural diversity promotion program for food security, food
                                                                        safety, crop diversification, paying attention to soil fertility
                                                                        maintenance and balance between food crops and other crops
                                                                        (industrial, biofuel);
                                                                  e. Seed production quality;
                                                                  f. Farming systems integrating crops, livestock, fisheries and
                                                                        agroforestry/forestry;

                      92
                                                                                National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                                             g. Sustainable cultivation management systems;
                                                             h. Invasive alien species;

                                                             2.2. Conserve crop, including their wild relatives and animal germplasm in     MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                   situ and ex situ as needed, so as to maintain and conserve genetic
                                                                   diversity;

                                                             2.3. Identify and use adaptive management practices, technologies and          MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                   policies that promote the positive effects and mitigate the negative
                                                                   impacts of agriculture on biodiversity;

                                                             2.4. Support extension services that will effectively promote the best research MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                   results, particularly in rural areas;

                                                             2.5. Review and improve the land tenure security, particularly for the poor; MAFF, MOE, GSSD

                                                             2.6. Develop market opportunities for agricultural products and address        MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                   market distortion for an equitable sharing of benefits arising from the
                                                                   utilization of agricultural products;

                                                             2.7. Improve animal health services, and animal production and productivity; MAFF, MOEYS, MOE,
                                                                                                                                                                GSSD

Strategic objective 3:                                       3.1 Support systems that are improving productivity and diversification of     MAFF, GSSD
                                                                   agriculture;
Maintain or strengthen measures that have a positive impact                                                                                 MAFF ,GSSD
on agriculture and animal production and thus ensure food    3.2 Replicate and expand areas where sustainable agriculture is practiced;
security for all, particularly for the rural and indigenous                                                                                 MAFF, MOE, MIH,
ethnic communities                                           3.3 Develop agro-industry respectfully of the environment;                     GSSD

                                                             3.4 Develop and promote agricultural product exports for increased incomes MAFF, MOE, MOC,

                                                             and job creation;                                                              GSSD

                                                             3.5 Develop infrastructure in rural areas for transporting agriculture products MAFF, MRD, MOE,

                                                             to the market;                                                                 GSSD

93
                                                                                                                   National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Strategic objective 4:                                      4.1 Strengthen the capacities of farmers, in particular indigenous ethnic            MAFF, MRD,
                                                                  minorities, local communities and their organizations, and other               MOEYS, GSSD
Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation        stakeholders for sustainable agricultural and animal production by:
of the strategic objectives and actions for sustainable           a. Training village development committee (VDC) on the rules,
agriculture and animal production                                      responsibilities and village action plan;
                                                                  b. Training farmers on improved cropping and livestock production
                                                                       systems respectful of the environment, including extension
                                                                       programmes on Integrated Pest Management (Farmer Field School);
                                                                  c. Raising awareness of agricultural diversity for food security;

                                                                  d. Promoting agricultural engineering;

                                                                  e. Improving infrastructure in rural areas;

                                                                  f. Improving and strengthening research and extension systems through
                                                                       technology transfer (including biotechnology) and the promotion of
                                                                       private sector participation, in (i) new and alternative crops, and (ii)
                                                                       animal genetics and breeding;

                                                            4.2 Improve market opportunity and access for agricultural and animal                MAFF, MOC, MOE,
                                                                  products, particularly for rural and indigenous ethnic communities;            GSSD

                                                            4.3 Take environmentally friendly measures that will improve the quality             MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                  and quantity of agricultural and animal production and thus encourage
                                                                  market expansion and the export of agricultural products;

                                                            4.4 Facilitate and take advantage of agricultural technology transfers and           MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                  agricultural cooperatives;

                                                            4.5 Enhance awareness on the regulations and legislations, and strengthen            MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                  law enforcement;

                                                            4.6 Encourage regional and international cooperation;                                MAFF, MOE, GSSD

                                                            4.7 Develop or identify and mobilize sustainable sources of financial                MAFF, MOE, GSSD
                                                                  resources;
                                                                                                                                                 MAFF, MRD, MOE,
                                                            4.8 Enhance awareness on guidelines and policies relating to indigenous              GSSD
                                                                  peoples rights and customary sustainable use of biodiversity, in
                                                                  cooperation with MRD.

94
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                       Theme 14: Sustainable Energy Resources Management

1. Background

In Cambodia, over 80 percent of the primary energy consumption is provided by fuel wood and charcoal.
The domestic use of fuel wood and charcoal commonly creates severe environmental problems due to
forest logging and indoor/outdoor air pollution. Cambodias energy supply also relies heavily on imported
fuels. With the increasing demand and increases of international fuel prices, the government has been
exploring new sources of energy, including hydropower, offshore and onshore oil and gas, and renewable
energy.

Energy is an important source or input for the economic and social development of any nation. Significant
energy use is relevant to the nature of energy services in different sectors of the economy and to
environmental constraints. Energy is required for cooking and lighting in households and for other uses of
social services. This shows that energy is a vital input for the social and economic development of
nations.

Many environmental problems are arising with energy supply and use that are related to global warming.
Such as air pollution, ozone layer depletion, forest destruction, and emission of radioactive substances.
These issues must be considered simultaneously if humanity is to achieve a bright energy future with
minimal environmental impacts. There is already much evidence that the future will be negatively
affected of humans continue degrading the environment.

Cambodia is heavily dependent on wood and biomass energy and will remain so in the mid-term. Not
only most poor rural families rely on firewood for cooking but also industries. Forests therefore play a
very important role in the national energy balance and wood and biomass energy will remain the most
accessible source of energy in the mid-term.

According to World Bank biomass is the dominant source of energy used in Cambodia making up to 85%
of the total energy consumption. Fuel wood and charcoal are the main form of biomass while agriculture
wastes (rice straw, palm leaves, coconut shells, corn cobs, cassava, sugarcane, cashew nut shells and
dung) are used to a lesser extent.

It is important note that fuel wood plays an important role for the poor and rural people. Thus attention
must be given to the role wood-energy can play in alleviating vulnerability and poverty. However, the
main source of fuel wood in Cambodia, natural forests, has been severely degraded due to
mismanagement over the past decades. Todays, wood fuel may be available in solid (i.e. fuel wood,
wood-chips, sawdust, pellets, briquettes, or charcoal), liquid (i.e. black liquor, methanol and pyrolitic oil),
or gasses (producer-gas) forms.

With progressive advancement in technology, new wood fuel in the forms of charcoal, briquettes,
dendrothermal power, wood-alcohol and producer-gas are used to generate heat and power, through
cogeneration. Recently, both woody and non-woody biomass is being utilized in wood and agro-
industries for energy generation, by using modern bio-energy technologies such as gasification for
example. With the hike and fuel prices, small scale industry and in particular the textile industry have
started substituting their boilers with wood, which is causing an unexpected and unaccounted for pressure
on biomass resources.

The biofuel industry was showing signs of development, led by the increasing international demand and
sustained increases in oil prices. The Cambodian Government through MME, negotiated with the Thai
Government to support the development of biofuels in Cambodia. In Cambodia, the case study showed a
very positive example of socially sustainable biofuel production that is benefiting smallholders and other
villages. Farmers gained more than the basic agricultural wage, paid less for electricity and had access to
Jatropha seeds cake for fertilizer. For smallholder families, who produce their own feedstock on small
plots (a double row 400m fence, 1,600 m2), and consumed their own oil in tractors and water pumps the
profit was USD440. The same farmer who only sells seeds makes a net profit of USD102 on the same
living fence. In the past three years, there has been a dynamic expansion of smallholder production of
cassava in Khampong Thom, Khampong Cham and Banteay Meanchey Provinces. Thai and Vietnamese
bioethanol processing enterprises send collectors in their own trucks to buy cassava tubers directly from
farmers at the farm gate. Cambodian cassava producers presently capture robust net returns of USD350
per hectare. In Cambodia, the major rice growing areas currently lie within the countrys economic
corridor between Thailand and Vietnam. Major expansion of biofuel feedstocks or other agricultural

                                                                95
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

production would impact adversely on the countrys dry forest eco-region that lies beyond the rice
production areas in the Thailand-Vietnam economic corridor.

By developing the proper framework conditions and facilitating the dissemination of efficient
technologies, the Royal Government of Cambodia has the opportunity to change wood-energy from a
factor of deforestation to a factor of income generation and socio-economic development.

First, the present strategy recommends conducting regular national flow surveys that will provide more
precise analysis of wood-energy supply/demand sustainability situation and raise awareness on the issue.

Secondly, forests are not equally distribution throughout the country and thus are locally overexploited.
Technologies on use are very energy inefficient. In the mid-term considering population growth and the
booming industrial sector (garment, brick), the solution to over utilization of forests is therefore to reduce
demand.

Household cooking energy represents a major part of national energy consumption. The use of improved
cook stoves in rural areas is limited. The dissemination of improved cook stoves supported through
production facilities and distribution networks should therefore have a significant impact in terms of
energy savings.

Although the industrial sectors demand is not significant, it is unclear how the sector will evolve in the
future. The garment and brick and tile factories are respectively sustained by exports markets and the high
demand of the construction sector, some of these factories use wood as their main source of energy.
Energy innovations must be piloted and, if validated, disseminated to reduce the industrial sectors energy
footprint on natural forests.

Thirdly, urban cooking energy is essentially composed of charcoal produced in Kampong Speu province.
Event thought the use of firewood as a direct cooking energy is decreasing; a decrease in the total wood
demand for charcoal and firewood is not expected. Without interventions, wood demand will actually
increase dramatically as 6 kg of wood are needed to produce 1 kg of charcoal. Even when considering the
higher heating values of charcoal, traditional charcoal-making technologies involve very low energy
efficiencies. Up to 80% of the energy content of the wood used for charcoal burning in earth mound kilns
is lost in the process. This trend is a serious concern as forest resources are already under pressure and
modern fuel such as LPG will not penetrate the urban markets fast enough to avoid forest degradation.

Thousands of families are involved in charcoal production turning vast areas of forests into barren lands.

A specific program shall disseminate improved charcoal kilns through these communities. Charcoal
technological innovations have been validated in Cambodia. Their dissemination shall be done in
collaboration with the Ministry of Environment and the Forestry Administration.

Fourthly, reduced demand and substitution options will not satisfy all needs. Rural communities have
legally the right to protect, manage and us forest resources. Future attention should therefore be given to
forest management, plantation and certification schemes and moreover the opportunity to increase income
of these managing communities. As it is not the mandate of MME, a collaboration should be sought with
the Forestry Administration to harmonize strategies and to implement a wood-energy supply program.

2. Issues

In addition to the issues described above, the following key issues were identified for consideration in the
updated NBSAP:

         (a) Potential impacts of energy production on ecosystems

         (b) Needed technical and financial support for various tasks including data collection and
               feasibility studies

         (c) In the case of biofuels, land availability and tenure, displacement of local communities, and food security

3. Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues

         (a) Strategic objective 1: Identify, inventory, monitor, manage information and data, and
               enhance awareness about the contribution of biodiversity to the countrys energy needs,

         (b) Strategic objective 2: Describe the direct and indirect impact of energy production and
                                                                96
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

               consumption on biodiversity components and on local communities, as well as on indigenous
               ethnic minorities; and apply, as appropriate, measures to avoid and mitigate this impact;
         (c) Strategic objective 3: Maintain or strengthen measures that have a positive impact on energy
               biomass and thus enhance biomass supply for energy production in a sustainable manner and
               to the benefit of all in Cambodia;
         (d) Strategic objective 4: Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation of the
               activities for biodiversity-friendly energy production, including acquisition and
               dissemination of appropriate technologies needed for the production and processing of
               biomass for energy.
The implementation of the strategic objectives under this theme (see Table 18 for key actions and actors)
will greatly benefit from the actions identified under the themes relating to forest resources (Theme 12),
agriculture (Theme 13), water resources (Theme 7), as well as awareness, education, research
coordination and development (Theme 20), clearing-house mechanism for technical and scientific
cooperation, knowledge sharing and information exchange (Theme 24), threatened plant species (Theme
2), land-use planning (Theme 6), customary use and traditional knowledge (Theme 16), community
participation (Theme 19) and resource mobilization (Theme 18).
While implementing the actions under these strategic objectives, it is important to have in mind that, as
stated in the NSDS (2009):
         (a) The vision for a sustainable energy sector in Cambodia is that by 2030 "Cambodia has rich
               renewable energy resources such as biomass, biogas, hydropower, solar and wind energy
               resources which are used in an efficient and environmentally sustainable way in order to
               fulfill all peoples and sectors needs of energy services, using a demand side management
               approach"; and
         (b) An important target is to achieve, by 2020, a widespread use of renewable energy, including
               up to 30% of biogas in urban and rural areas instead of fuelwood and charcoal use.

                                                                97
                                                                           National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Table 18: Key actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their implementation under the theme on "Sustainable Energy
             Resources Management"

Strategic Objectives                                          Key Actions                                                                       Coordinating and
                                                                                                                                                   participating
                                                                                                                                                  ministries and
                                                                                                                                                      agencies

Strategic objective 1:                                        1.1 Compile and analyze information and data on the energy needs of the           MME, GSSD,
                                                                    country, including consumption patterns of households.                      MAFF, MOE, MRD
Identify, inventory, monitor, manage information and data,
and enhance awareness about the contribution of               1.2 Assess the current and potential contribution of different types/sources of   MME, GSSD,
biodiversity to the country's energy needs.                         energy, including biodiversity, to the countrys energy needs and compare    MAFF, MOE,
                                                                    their costs and benefits, taking into account production zones, village     MRD,
                                                                    woodlots, tree planting including in public areas, agro-forest activities,
                                                                    agricultural and animal wastes, and household preference schemes for fuel
                                                                    substitution (crop/animal residue, woody biomass, commercial fuels, etc.),
                                                                    trading patterns.

                                                              1.3 Study fuelwood and, in general, energy biomass flows to assess                MME, GSSD,
                                                                    sustainability of production and use.                                       MAFF, MOE, MRD

                                                              1.4 Assess the potential of biofuels in the country (sources of feedstock, costs  MME, GSSD
                                                                    and impacts in life cycle) including both positive and possible negative    MAFF, MOE, MRD
                                                                    aspects.

Strategic objective 2:                                        2.1 Assess the current and potential impact of the energy sector on biodiversity  MME, GSSD,
                                                                    and its ecosystem services, including in particular                         MAFF, MOE, MRD
Describe the direct and indirect impact of energy production
and consumption on biodiversity components and on local             a. The impact of fuelwood harvest on deforestation;
communities as well as indigenous ethnic minorities; and
apply, as appropriate, measures to avoid and mitigate this          b. The impact of biofuel production on agricultural land and food
impact.                                                                 production and security; and

                                                                    c. A life cycle analysis (LCA) to assess and compare the carbon footprint
                                                                        of biofuels and other sources of energy.

                      98
                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                                             2.2 Reduce the impact of the energy sector on biodiversity and its ecosystem services by:  MME, GSSD
                                                                                                                                                        MAFF, MOE, MRD
                                                                   a. Introducing improved technologies into all aspects of wood-sourced
                                                                         energy and biomass residue supply and demand chains, and improving
                                                                         efficiency of wood in use, and thus reducing the need for wood;

                                                             b. Substituting wood with other sources of energy such as biomass, wood
                                                                  residue and agricultural residues, for instance by promoting the use of
                                                                  alternative energy sources to reduce fuelwood use and diversify energy
                                                                  sources by developing and implementing energy efficiency programs
                                                                  for households in areas where fuelwood is limited, or by using improved
                                                                  cooking stoves and/or biogas digesters for household and small business;

                                                             c. Promoting fuelwood and multipurpose tree plantations at the family and
                                                                  community level: tree planting in public areas, agroforestry or on-farm
                                                                  tree planting, village woodlot allocation for sustainable fuelwood
                                                                  collection, integration of wood fuel production into community forestry
                                                                  so as to ensure sustainable fuelwood supply and prevent negative
                                                                  impacts of energy development and use on natural ecosystems

                                                             (Also see theme 12 on Forest Resources); and

                                                             d. Developing more efficient charcoal production methods.

                                                             2.3 Apply to energy development projects, in particular hydropower and oil                 MME, MAFF,
                                                                   exploitation projects, the Voluntary Guidelines on Biodiversity-Inclusive            MOE GSSD, MRD
                                                                   Impact Assessment (CBD Decision VIII/28 also adopted by the Ramsar
                                                                   Convention) and the Akwé: Kon Voluntary guidelines for the conduct of
                                                                   cultural, environmental and social impact assessments regarding
                                                                   developments proposed to take place on, or which are likely to impact on,
                                                                   sacred sites and on lands and waters traditionally occupied or used by
                                                                   indigenous peoples and local communities (Annex to CBD decision VI/7 A).

                                                             2.4 Promote the use of local natural resources for energy supply based on                  MME, MAFF,
                                                                   environmental sustainability, leastcost options and equitable access to              GSSD

                                                                   electricity services.

                                                             2.5 Promote small water investment in local community.                                     MME, MOE, MRD

Strategic objective 3:                                       3.1 Support the implementation of the energy sector strategy, including the                MME, GSSD
                                                                   MIMEs 2004 draft Energy Strategy listing interventions to improve the
Maintain or strengthen measures that have a positive impact        sustainable supply and use of biomass in Cambodia.
on energy biomass and thus enhance biomass supply for

99
                                                               National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

energy production in a sustainable manner, and the benefits    3.2 Improve the lives and income of the communities, in particular the marginal MRD, MME
to all in Cambodia.                                                  poor, presently engaged in biomass supply and demand chains.

                                                               3.3 Integrate biomass into the existing planning development processes such as           MME, MOE
                                                                     rural and community development plans, rural electrification plans, poverty        MAFF, MRD,
                                                                     reduction strategies, and decentralized commune planning processes, with           GSSD
                                                                     the participation of all relevant ministries, particularly MME and MAFF
                                                                     with its Forestry Administration.

Strategic objective 4:                                         4.1 Formulate a policy and action plan for a sustainable energy system in                MME, GSSD
                                                                     Cambodia based on renewable energy, energy efficiency and demand side              MME, GSSD
Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation           management.
of the activities under this theme, including the acquisition
and dissemination of appropriate technologies needed for the   4.2 Develop and strengthen the human and technological capacity needed for
production and processing of biomass for energy.                     the implementation of the activities identified under this theme on energy
                                                                     resources.

                                                               4.3 Strengthen institutions, and ensure adequate planning and the effective              MME, GSSD
                                                                     implementation of the energy sector strategy, the energy law, related laws
                                                                     and policies associated with biodiversity conservation and sustainable use.

                                                               4.4 Encourage the development of standards and energy certification to promote MME, GSSD
                                                                     green energy from renewable and sustainable sources in the country.

                                                               4.5 Develop a formal and regulated biomass trading and production system                 MAFF, MOC,
                                                                     which ensures equitable prices, sustainability of supply and the                   GSSD
                                                                     acknowledgement of its contribution to the economy, while ensuring
                                                                     avoidance of the importation of fossil fuels.

                                                               4.6 Develop positive incentives from diversified and sustainable sources and             MME, MAFF,
                                                                     that are respectful of biodiversity, our natural capital, to secure participation  MOE MRD, GSSD
                                                                     of all in the conservation and sustainable use of biological and genetic
                                                                     resources and the associated traditional knowledge while producing energy.

                                                               4.7 Integrate the best practices from the implementation of the energy sector            MME, GSSD
                                                                     strategy in communication, education, and public awareness programmes,
                                                                     using the national clearing-house mechanism.

100
     National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

     4.8 Support cooperation between the departments of energy and relevant  MME, GSSD
           departments in other Ministries.

     4.9 Mobilize financial support for capacity building on techniques and research MME, GSSD
           activities relating to green energy production.

101
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                  Theme 15: Access and Benefit-Sharing

1. Background

The Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits
Arising from their Utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity was adopted in 2010 in Nagoya,
Japan at the tenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties (COP) to the Convention on Biological
Diversity (CBD) in its decision X/1. The Protocol, which aims at sharing the benefits arising from the
utilization of genetic resources in a fair and equitable way, including by appropriate access to genetic
resources and transfer of relevant technologies and funding, is the result of long and delicate negotiations
that started in 2005. These negotiations built on the Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and
Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising out of their Utilization adopted in 2002 to assist Parties
when establishing administrative, legislative or policy measures on access and benefit-sharing and/or
when negotiating contractual arrangements for access to genetic resources and benefit-sharing, and
following the call for action by Governments at the World Summit on Sustainable Development in 2002.

At the same meeting in 2010, the world community adopted the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-
2020 containing Aichi Target 16, which states that by 2015, the Nagoya Protocol should become
operational and be consistent with national legislations. The Protocol came into effect on 12 October
2014. Cambodia signed the Protocol in February 2012, translated it in the Khmer language and became
Party on 19 April 2015.

Advantages expected from the Protocol are that37:

         (a) Legal certainty with respect to access to genetic resources and the fair and equitable sharing
               of benefits arising from their utilization;

         (b) Compliance provisions of the Protocol as well as the provisions establishing more
               predictable conditions for access to genetic resources will contribute to ensuring the sharing
               of benefits when genetic resources leave a Party providing genetic resources;

         (c) The Protocols provisions on access to traditional knowledge held by indigenous
               peoples/indigenous ethnic minorities and local communities when it is associated with
               genetic resources will strengthen the ability of these communities to benefit from the use of
               their knowledge, innovations and practices;

         (d) The Protocol will create incentives to conserve biological diversity, sustainably use its
               components, and further enhance the contribution of biological diversity to sustainable
               development and human well-being. This will result from the promotion of the use of genetic
               resources and associated traditional knowledge, and the strengthening of the opportunities
               for fair and equitable sharing of benefits from their use.

There exist other instruments38 that support the objectives and implementation of the Protocol; including
international agreements such as the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and
Agriculture (ITPGRFA), Guidelines on Access and Benefit-sharing in research projects or codes of
conduct, International Code of Conduct for Plant Germplasm Collecting and Transfer.

The fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of the utilization of genetic resources is one of
the three core objectives of the Convention on Biological Diversity (Article 1). A framework for its
implementation is provided in Article 15 of the Convention. Many other CBD provisions39 are of
relevance to the objective and implementation of the Protocol. Some of the provisions in these articles are
emphasized in the Preamble of the Protocol as follows:

         (a) Technology transfer and cooperation to build research and innovation capacities for adding
               value to genetic resources can make significant contributions to sustainable development,
               poverty eradication and environmental sustainability, and can thereby contribute to achieving
               the Millennium Development Goals;

         (b) Public awareness of the economic value of ecosystems and other biodiversity components,
               and the fair and equitable sharing of this economic value with the custodians of biodiversity
               are key incentives for the conservation of biological diversity and the sustainable use of its
               components;

                                                               102
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

         (c) Women play a vital role in access and benefit-sharing and therefore need to participate fully
               at all levels of policy-making and implementation for biodiversity conservation.

These articles and provisions of the Protocol articulate well what needs to be done by the Parties in order
to implement the Protocol effectively. These articles also indicate that this theme is linked to many others
in the Cambodias NBSAP, such as themes 9 on Industry, Technology and Services; 15 on resource
mobilization; 16 on community participation; 18 on Awareness, Education, Research Coordination and
Development; or 22 on Technology and Information Sharing (CHM). At its first meeting held in 2014,
the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity Serving as the Meeting of the
Parties to the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of the
Benefits Arising from their Utilization provided additional detailed guidance with regard to measures
needed for capacity-building and capacity development40, and to measures for raising awareness of the
importance of genetic resources and associated traditional knowledge41. They were used in the
development of the strategic objectives under this theme and for the identification of the key actions for
the implementation of these strategic objectives.
Accession to the Nagoya Protocol and adoption of legislation and policies on access to genetic resources
and the sharing of benefits from the utilization of genetic resources is important for Cambodia. There is
an estimated 3000 plant species, with at least 700 additional new species. In the year 2000, 8260 plant
species were found in Cambodia, 10% of which are endemic. Access to this biodiversity needs to be
regulated.
Cambodia has no existing legislation on access and benefit-sharing, but government ministries and
institutions recognize its importance and a process to develop such legislation and policies is underway.
Access and Benefit-Sharing (ABS) is a new topic to the public. There is therefore a limited understanding
of access and benefit-sharing issues, making the formulation of a national policy challenging. There is a
constraint in both expertize on ABS issues and financial resources.
2. Issues
The following key issues were identified:

         (a) Limited human and financial capacity for implementing ABS policies;
         (b) Lack of awareness on the ABS concept. At its first meeting, COP/MOP recognized that

               raising awareness amongst users of genetic resources was a priority for the effective
               implementation of the Nagoya Protocol and played a critical role for the overall success of
               the Protocol.
         (c) Poor communication, networking and policy development.
3. Strategic objectives
The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues:
         (a) Strategic objective 1: Strengthen Communication, Education and Public Awareness (CEPA)
               on access and benefits-sharing (ABS);
         (b) Strategic objective 2: Develop and implement a national ABS policy and legislation;
         (c) Strategic objective 3: Enhance the enabling environment for the development of ABS
               legislation and the implementation of the Nagoya Protocol on ABS and related legislation.

                                                               103
                                                                                            National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Table 19: Key actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their implementation under the theme on "Access and benefit-sharing"

Strategic Objectives                                                           Key Actions                                                        Coordinating and
                                                                                                                                                     participating
                                                                                                                                                    ministries and
                                                                                                                                                        agencies

Strategic Objective 1:                                1.1. Conduct an assessment of stakeholder capacities for access and benefit sharing (ABS).  MOE, GSSD

Strengthen Communication, Education and Public        1.2. Conduct a survey and assessment of the status of ABS education and educational         MOE, GSSD,
Awareness (CEPA) on access and benefits-sharing             material.                                                                             MOEYS
(ABS).

                                                      1.3. Analyze encountered ABS issues and identify gaps, challenges and opportunities for MOE, GSSD,

                                                      conducting CEPA on ABS.                                                                     MOEYS

                                                      1.4. Identify and distinguish target groups for formal, non-formal education and            MOE, GSSD,
                                                            awareness-raising programs.                                                           MOEYS

                                                      1.5. Identify resources needs for implementing CEPA-ABS program.                            MOE, GSSD,
                                                                                                                                                  MOEYS

                                                      1.6. Develop and implement CEPA-ABS strategy based on identified needs and national MOE, GSSD,

                                                      circumstances.                                                                              MOEYS

                                                      1.7. Develop and implement CEPA-ABS Action Plan for individual target groups.               MOE, GSSD,
                                                                                                                                                  MOEYS

                                                      1.8. Establish a coordination mechanism to implement the Nagoya Protocol and national MOE, GSSD,

                                                      legislation on ABS in cooperation with regional and global organizations.                   MOEYS

                                                      1.9. Build networks of relevant stakeholders, including indigenous ethnic minorities and MOE, GSSD,

                                                      local communities, academia, researchers, scientists and the private sector.                MOEYS

                                                      1.10. Develop institutional arrangements to implement the Nagoya Protocol and establish MOE, GSSD,

                                                      a well-functioning national competence authority and national focal points.                 MOEYS

                                                 104
                                                                                                               National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                                      1.11. Organize and conduct CEPA-ABS events such as: training activities, seminars,            MOE, GSSD,
                                                            workshops, public forums, conferences.                                                  MOEYS

                                                      1.12. Develop educational and awareness materials, toolkits and media on ABS and              MOE, GSSD,
                                                            traditional knowledge.                                                                  MOEYS

                                                      1.13. Cooperate with regional and global networks to compile scientific evidence              MOE, GSSD
                                                            particularly for decision-makers.                                                       MOEYS, MOP

                                                      1.14. Mainstream ABS and traditional knowledge into educational curriculums for               MOE, GSSD,
                                                            primary, secondary and high school.                                                     MOEYS

                                                      1.15. Develop and conduct a training of trainers program on ABS and traditional               MOE, GSSD,
                                                            knowledge.                                                                              MOEYS

                                                      1.16. Develop, manage, and maintain a user-friendly ABS-Traditional Knowledge (TK)            MOE, GSSD,
                                                            information system and share widely at the national, regional and global levels.        MOEYS

                                                      1.17. Employ the best available communication tools and internet-based systems for ABS MOE, GSSD,

                                                      activities including the Clearing-House Mechanism.                                            MOEYS

                                                      1.18. Evaluate the effectiveness of awareness-raising activities and adjust the national      MOE, GSSD,
                                                            awareness-raising strategy as appropriate based on feedback.                            MOEYS

Strategic Objective 2:                                2.1 Compile information and assess existing national policy and legal documents related       MOE, GSSD,
                                                           to ABS and traditional knowledge, so as to identify gaps in light of the obligations of  MOEYS
Develop and implement a national ABS policy and            the Protocol.
legislation.

                                                      2.2 Establish a legal expert team or multi sectorial legal working group to review and        MOE, GSSD,
                                                                                                                                                    MOEYS
                                                           analyze existing national policies, strategies, codes of conduct, and other relevant

                                                           documents including inter alia community guidelines on natural resource use,
                                                           community rights for land-use and property right policies.

                                                      2.3 Identify individual stakeholders and key institutions that can contribute in the process MOE, GSSD,

                                                      of the national ABS policy and legislation development.                                       MOEYS

                                                 105
                                                                                    National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                                       2.4 Identify traditional knowledge and ABS issues relating to the commercial and non-      MOE, GSSD,
                                                            commercial uses of genetic resources to be considered for policy development.         MOEYS

                                                       2.5 Compile good practices on TK and sustainable use of natural resources by local         MOE, GSSD,
                                                            community and the private sector for use in developing guidelines and for             MOEYS
                                                            consideration in the development of ABS legislations and policies.

                                                       2.6 Identify the nature, characteristics, key aspects, and context of ABS policy and       MOE, GSSD,
                                                            legislation that need to be developed.                                                MOEYS

                                                       2.7 Identify priority ABS policies, legislation and guidelines for immediate effect and    MOE, GSSD,
                                                            action.                                                                               MOEYS

                                                       2.8 Develop an action plan for policy legislation development.                             MOE, GSSD,
                                                                                                                                                  MOEYS

                                                       2.9 Develop ABS policy and law, including procedures for granting or refusing to grant     MOE, GSSD,
                                                            prior informed consent (PIC), and measures to ensure law enforcement.                 MOEYS

                                                       2.10 Strengthen coordination and collaboration with relevant stakeholders, including       MOE, GSSD,

                                                       private sector and civil society to support the process of ABS policy development. MOEYS

                                                       2.11 Enhance the capacity of government institutions and policy makers to support and      MOE, GSSD,
                                                             adopt the national ABS policy through consultation meetings, workshops,              MOEYS
                                                             conferences, and other means.

Strategic Objectives 3:                                3.1 Support a national focal point and one or more competent national authorities on       MOE, GSSD
                                                                                                                                                  MOE, GSSD
Enhance the enabling environment for the development   access and benefit-sharing.

of ABS legislation and the implementation of the       3.2 Enhance participation and diversify governance, especially at the political levels.
Nagoya Protocol on ABS and related legislation.

                                                       3.3 Assess capacity needs and priorities of indigenous ethnic minorities and local         MOE, MRD,
                                                             communities (ILCs) and relevant stakeholders, including the business sector and the  GSSD
                                                             research community.

                                                       3.4 Strengthen the capacities of indigenous ethnic minorities and local communities, in MOE, MRD,
                                                             particular women within those communities, and relevant stakeholders, including

                                                  106
                                                    National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

     the business sector and the research community to handle ABS issues including for GSSD
     negotiating mutually agreed terms (MAT).

     3.5 Develop minimum requirements, as appropriate, for MAT to secure the fair and          MOE, MRD,
           equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of relevant traditional  GSSD
           knowledge.

     3.6 Develop community protocols in relation to access to traditional knowledge and the    MOE, MRD,
           fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of traditional  GSSD
           knowledge.

     3.7 Develop model contractual clauses for benefit-sharing arising from the utilization of MOE, MRD,

     traditional knowledge.                                                                    GSSD

     3.8 Enhance technological capacities.                                                     MOE, GSSD

     3.9 Enhance sustainable financial capacities.                                             MOE, GSSD

     3.10 Strengthen the existing coordination mechanism and cooperation among                 MOE, GSSD
           stakeholders to implement ABS Action Plan and Program.

     3.11 Strengthen the capacity of the national competent authority.                         MOE, GSSD

     3.12 Strengthen knowledge and science-based decision-making.                              MOE, GSSD
                                                                                               MOEYS

     3.13 Establish internal networking and promote informational exchange among farmers, MOE, GSSD,

     indigenous groups, local authorities, and beneficiaries of genetic resources.             MOEYS, MAFF

     3.14 Pilot implementation of national ABS legislation and Nagoya Protocol on ABS at       MOE, GSSD,
           the national and sub national levels.                                               MOEYS MAFF

     3.15 Promote endogenous scientific research on values of biodiversity, particularly       MOE, GSSD,
           genetic resources and on adding value to national genetic resources.                MOEYS

     3.16 Compile baseline information and data on native and non-native species.              MOE, GSSD,
                                                                                               MOEYS

107
                                                 National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

     3.17 Establish a functional ABS-CHM to promote ABS information sharing and                 MOE, GSSD,
           international cooperation to comply with the national legislation and Nagoya         MOEYS
           Protocol on ABS.

     3.18 Enhance understanding and organize information in user-friendly databases on the      MOE, GSSD,
           functioning, role, value and national requirements to access genetic resources for   MOEYS
           commercial and non-commercial use.

     3.19 Make information on national ABS policies, relevant guidelines, and other tools of    MOE, GSSD,
           relevance to decision-making widely accessible.                                      MOEYS

     3.20 Encourage the ways and means to respect local communities and traditional knowledge.  MOE, GSSD,
                                                                                                MOEYS

     3.21 Integrate ABS issues and activities into relevant sector strategies and national.     MOE, GSSD,
           sustainable development policies.                                                    MOEYS

     3.22 Implement national ABS policy and legislation, and additional specific provisions     MOE, GSSD,
           related to ABS from relevant regional and international agreements.                  MOEYS

     3.23 Enhance the contribution of benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources MOE, GSSD,

     to local livelihoods and national economy.                                                 MOEYS

     3.24 Ensure fair and equitable benefit sharing from genetic resource utilization and TK,   MOE, GSSD,
           with special attention to the most vulnerable groups especially indigenous peoples   MOEYS
           and local communities.

     3.25 Ensure that national ABS policies are implemented individually or through networks    MOE, GSSD,
           within regional, sub national or groups of users, and contribute to the              MOEYS
           implementation of Cambodias sustainable development goals including poverty
           eradication and the well-being throughout the nation.

108
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

               Theme 16: Customary Sustainable Use and Traditional Knowledge

1. Background

For centuries, indigenous peoples and local communities have relied on home gardening, subsistence
agriculture, fishing, hunting and the gathering of plant materials for food, medicines, and the like. As a
result, over time, they have accumulated substantial knowledge that is relevant to sustainable resource use
and management, and the conservation of biodiversity in their traditional territories. Customary use
practices are learned and applied in hands-on settings and are transmitted orally. Although these
customary use practices are maintained over the years, indigenous peoples and local communities have
been able to adapt them to changes in environmental, social, economic and political conditions, as needed
and within the limits set by the ecosystems in which they live.

When adopting the Convention on Biological Diversity, the world community acknowledged the
interconnectedness and mutual reinforcement of biodiversity traditional knowledge and customary use in
the preamble, as well as in Articles 8(j) and 10(c) of the Convention. It is important to note that these
articles refer to customary use and traditional knowledge that are of communities whose traditional
cultural practices are "compatible" with conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity.

In order to operationalize these articles, the Conference of the Parties (COP) to the Convention on
Biological Diversity (CBD) endorsed a programme of work on Article 8(j) and related provisions in 2000
under Decision V/16, with the objective of promoting a just implementation of Article 8(j) and related
provisions, at the local, national, regional and international levels and ensuring the full and effective
participation of indigenous people and local communities at all stages and levels of its implementation.
Subsequently, the Conference of the Parties to the CBD adopted additional tools of relevance to
customary use and traditional knowledge:

         (a) The Plan of Action for the retention of traditional knowledge, innovations and practices
               (Appendix of decision VII/16, E).

         (b) The Akwé: Kon Voluntary Guidelines for the Conduct of Cultural, Environmental and Social
               Impact Assessments Regarding Developments Proposed to Take Place on, or which are
               Likely to Impact on, Sacred Sites and on Lands and Waters Traditionally Occupied or Used
               by Indigenous peoples and Local Communities;

         (c) The Tkarihwaié:ri Code of Ethical Conduct to ensure respect for the cultural and intellectual
               heritage of indigenous people and local communities; and

         (d) The Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of
               Benefits Arising from their Utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity.

In addition to the CBD, a number of other international frameworks contain provisions directly related to
traditional knowledge and customary sustainable use: (i) the Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual
Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore, World Intellectual Property
Organization; (ii) the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture; and (iii)
the 2007 United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, and, to some extent, (iv) the
Satoyama Initiative42.

In 2010, the COP to the CBD adopted the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 with 20 so called
Aichi Biodiversity Targets. Target 18 states that "by 2020, the traditional knowledge, innovations and
practices of indigenous and local communities relevant for the conservation and sustainable use of
biodiversity, and their customary use of biological resources, are respected, subject to national legislation
and relevant international obligations, and fully integrated and reflected in the implementation of the
Convention with the full and effective participation of indigenous and local communities, at all relevant
levels". Customary use and traditional knowledge are also relevant to the other targets. The CBD COP
invited Parties to address customary sustainable use, in particular customary sustainable use policies, in
their national biodiversity strategies and action plans, with the full and effective participation of
indigenous peoples and local communities.

At its 12th meeting, the CBD COP invited the Working Group on Indicators of the International
Indigenous Forum on Biodiversity and other international organizations, and particularly the Community-
Based Monitoring and Information System approach, to operationalize the indicators on the status of
traditional knowledge, innovations and practices and customary sustainable use of biological diversity

                                                               109
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

contained in document UNEP/CBD/WG8J/8/9: "Indicators relevant for traditional knowledge and
customary sustainable use"43. It was also recognized that many indigenous peoples and local communities
are engaged in community-based initiatives that enhance the implementation of Article 10(c) at the
national and local levels. Such initiatives include research and documentation of traditional knowledge
and customary practices, education projects to revitalize indigenous languages and traditional knowledge
associated with customary sustainable use of biological diversity, and community-based sustainable
resource management plans. Some attention should also be given to traditional knowledge shared across
borders as opportunities for international and regional cooperation.

The integration of Articles 8(j) and 10(c) of the CBD and their implementation as cross-cutting issues in
the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020, the Aichi Biodiversity Targets, the national biodiversity
targets, and the sustainable development goals is strategic, and a way to ensure the protection and
maintenance of biocultural values for achieving human well-being. This was emphasized in the decision44
taken by the CBD Conference of the Parties at its 12th meeting in 2014 regarding Article 8(j) and related
provisions, which contains in its annex the Plan of Action on Customary Sustainable Use of Biological
Diversity. Parties, other Governments, relevant organizations, indigenous peoples and local communities
and stakeholders were all invited to implement the plan of action on customary sustainable use of
biological diversity, taking into account diverse national circumstances including legal and policy
regimes, and to report progress through the national reporting process. The first task in the Plan of Action
is to incorporate customary sustainable use practices or policies, with the full and effective participation
of indigenous peoples and local communities, into national biodiversity strategies and action plans.

The following points45 from that Plan of Action, echoing the principles in the other international
frameworks referred to above, represent an adequate basis for expressing the strategic goals and actions
for the updated NBSAP:

         (a) Traditional knowledge should be valued, given the same respect and considered as useful
               and necessary as other forms of knowledge. The CBD Secretariat developed a Traditional
               Knowledge Information Portal in order to promote awareness and enhance access by
               indigenous peoples and local communities and other interested parties to information on
               traditional knowledge, innovations and practices relevant for the conservation and
               sustainable use of biological diversity;

         (b) Biodiversity, customary use of biodiversity by communities whose traditional lifestyles are
               relevant for the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity and referred to hereafter as
               customary sustainable use, and traditional knowledge are intrinsically linked;

         (c) Indigenous peoples and local communities, through customary sustainable use of biological
               diversity, constantly shape and reshape social and ecological systems, landscapes, seascapes,
               plants and animal populations, genetic resources and related management practices. They are
               therefore well placed to adapt to changing conditions such as climate change, and thus
               contribute to strengthening the resilience of the social and ecological systems, as well as the
               generation of new knowledge;

         (d) Customary sustainable use of biodiversity is in line with and illustrates the ecosystem
               approach46 and the Addis Ababa Principles and Guidelines for the Sustainable Use of
               Biodiversity47 (commonly referred to as "Addis Ababa Principles and Guidelines");

         (e) The full and effective participation of indigenous peoples and local communities, in
               particular women, is of primary importance for the successful development and
               implementation of policies and programmes for customary sustainable use of biological
               diversity;

         (f) Cultural, social, economic and ecological elements associated with the traditional
               management systems of lands, waters and territories of indigenous peoples and local
               communities and their involvement in the management of these areas should be recognized,
               secured and protected, as they contribute to customary sustainable use of biological
               diversity;

         (g) Customary use practices are often linked to sui generis systems consisting of customary
               regulations, moral codes, ethical norms, and specific sanctions that help regulate equitable
               access to resources and help protect local resources from overuse, thus promoting

                                                               110
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

               sustainability. Sui generis systems guiding customary use are by definition local and
               therefore unique, but they are usually guided by community protocols and other mechanisms
               such as common principles, least damage and waste in resource harvesting and use,
               harvesting within the safe ecosystem limits using strategies like seasonal closures and the
               creation of protected areas, protection of sacred species and sites, and protection of the rights
               of future generations to enjoy the benefits of biological diversity;
         (h) Because of the connections between customary use and traditional knowledge, it is important
               to consult and, as far as possible, involve indigenous peoples and local communities in all
               aspects of research, documentation, the establishment of related policy guidelines, and in all
               matters that will impact their lives or affect their wellbeing. Consideration of the right to
               free, prior and informed consent as reflected in the United Nations Declaration on the Rights
               of Indigenous Peoples and the promotion of ethical practices of research are important in this
               context.
2. Issues
The following key issues were identified:
         (a) Lack of baseline survey;
         (b) Pressure on land development and conversion;
         (c) Customary use and traditional rights are limited; and
         (d) No fair and equitable benefit sharing with indigenous ethnic minorities and local
               communities.
3. Strategic objectives
The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues
         (a) Strategic objective 1: Ensure that biodiversity customary sustainable use practices and
               traditional knowledge are valued, respected, protected and considered as useful and
               necessary for achieving Cambodias biodiversity targets and for contributing to the countrys
               sustainable development and poverty eradication;
         (b) Strategic objective 2: Support and strengthen community-based initiatives that contribute to
               the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity;
         (c) Strategic objective 3: Apply traditional knowledge and customary sustainable use of
               biological diversity with the active involvement and effective participation of relevant
               indigenous ethnic minorities and local communities.

                                                               111
                                                                                                        National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Table 20: Key actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their implementation under the theme on "Customary Sustainable Use
             and Traditional Knowledge"

                       Strategic Objectives              Key Actions                                                                                     Coordinating and
                                                                                                                                                            participating
Strategic objective 1:                                                                                                                                     ministries and
Ensure that biodiversity customary sustainable use                                                                                                             agencies
practices and traditional knowledge are valued,
respected, protected and considered as useful and        1.1 Document customary sustainable use practices, related traditional knowledge and MOE, MAFF, MRD,
necessary for achieving Cambodia's biodiversity
targets and for contributing to the country's            the possible sui generis systems guiding those customary use practices.                         GSSD, MOEYS
sustainable development and poverty eradication.
                                                         1.2 Enhance awareness of the value of customary sustainable use practices and                   MOE, MAFF, MRD,
                                                               associated traditional knowledge.                                                         GSSD, MOEYS

                                                         1.3 Integrate customary sustainable use practices and associated traditional                    MOE, MAFF, MRD,

                                                         knowledge in biodiversity resources management under all relevant themes of                     GSSD, MOEYS

                                                         the NBSAP with the full and effective participation of representatives of the local

                                                         communities and indigenous ethnic minorities.

                                                         1.4 Operationalize the indicators on the status of traditional knowledge, innovations           MOE, MAFF, MRD,
                                                               and practices and customary sustainable use, to assess progress towards                   GSSD, MOEYS
                                                               achieving relevant actions in the NBSAP and the Cambodia Biodiversity Targets,
                                                               as well as in the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 and the Aichi
                                                               Biodiversity Targets.

                                                         1.5 Value traditional knowledge shared across borders as opportunities for                      MOE, MAFF, MRD,
                                                               international and regional cooperation.                                                   GSSD

Strategic objective 2:                                   2.1 Mobilize funds and other forms of support to promote and strengthen                         MOE, MAFF, MRD,
                                                               community-based initiatives that contribute to the conservation and sustainable           GSSD, MOEYS
Support and strengthen community-based initiatives             use of biodiversity, with the full and effective participation of local communities
that contribute to the conservation and sustainable use        and indigenous ethnic minorities, including by supporting them in their
of biodiversity.                                               development of project proposals for funding.

                                                         2.2 Collate case studies, experiences and approaches on community-based natural                 MOE, MAFF, MRD,
                                                               resources management and make them available through, for example, the                    GSSD, MOEYS,
                                                               national CHM, the Traditional Knowledge Information Portal of the CBD Secretariat         MOP
                                                               and the information portal of the International Indigenous Forum on Biodiversity (IIFB).

                                                    112
                                                                          National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                                              2.3 Reinforce mechanisms that will promote cooperation regarding community-               MOE, MAFF, MRD,

                                                              based initiatives among the relevant regional and global agreements signed /              GSSD, MOEYS

                                                              ratified by Cambodia, including inter alia, CBD, CITES, Ramsar Convention

                                                              and the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture

                                                              (ITPGRFA).

Strategic objective 3:                                        3.1 Encourage the application of traditional knowledge and customary sustainable          MOE, MAFF, MRD,
                                                                    use of biological diversity in the planning, designing, establishment and           GSSD, MOEYS
Apply traditional knowledge and customary                           management of protected and conservation areas and their integration in the
sustainable use of biological diversity with the active             wider landscapes and seascapes.
involvement and effective participation of relevant
indigenous ethnic minorities and local communities            3.2 Encourage the application of traditional knowledge and customary sustainable          MOE, MAFF, MRD,
                                                                    use of biological diversity in the recovery of endangered species, and in the       GSSD, MOEYS
                                                                    establishment and management of ex-situ conservation areas.

                                                              3.3 Encourage the application of traditional knowledge and customary sustainable          MOE, MAFF, MRD,
                                                                    use of biological diversity in land-use planning, and landscape and seascape        GSSD, MOEYS
                                                                    management.

                                                              3.4 Ensure the application of traditional knowledge and customary sustainable use of      MOE, MAFF, MRD,
                                                                    biological diversity in the management of plant, animal and microbial resources     GSSD, MOEYS
                                                                    in all biomes, including agricultural lands, inland waters, marine and coastal
                                                                    areas and forests, and other resources such as mineral and energy resources.

                                                              3.5 Ensure the application of traditional knowledge and customary sustainable use of MOE, MAFF, MRD,
                                                                    biological diversity in awareness-raising, research and education programmes. GSSD, MOEYS

                                                              3.6 Promote the development and conservation of traditional knowledge of the              MRD, MAFF, GSSD,
                                                                    indigenous ethnic minorities and local communities in order to maintain the         MOE
                                                                    cultures and traditions of these minorities, including by undertaking research and
                                                                    documentation of traditional knowledge and customary practices, education
                                                                    projects to revitalize indigenous languages and traditional knowledge associated
                                                                    with customary sustainable use of biological diversity, and community-based
                                                                    sustainable resource management plans.

                                                         113
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                   GROUP 3: ENABLING ENVIRONMENT (Themes 17 to 24)

     Theme 17: Industry, Technology and Services (Manufacturing, Biotechnology and
                                           Biosafety, and Tourism)

Sustainable Manufacturing Industry Management

1. Background

The manufacturing industry in Cambodia is composed of a few thousand large, medium or small-scale
enterprises that have either a direct or indirect impact on the environment. Garment, tanning, textile,
plastic, rubber, rice milling and other food processing, fishing, wood and wood products, rubber, cement,
gem mining, tube factories and construction, tourism, and oil and natural gas industries can impact
biodiversity adversely through the discharge of gaseous, liquid and solid wastes that cause water, air and
soil pollution. They can also have an adverse impact on biodiversity through habitat fragmentation and
degradation, as well as overexploitation of biological resources.

At the time of the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, most factories did not have environmental management
systems and there was no environmental impact assessment procedure in place for new industrial projects.
Considering that increasing the environmental performance of the manufacturing industry would not only
improve its efficiency but would also facilitate the selling of industrial products on environmentally
sensitive international markets, the NBSAP focused strategically on awareness-raising so as to promote
the use of environmentally friendly processes, adequate management of hazardous and other waste
materials, environmental pollution control and monitoring systems and environmental impact assessments
in the manufacturing sector.

Since the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, there have been a lot of awareness-raising programmes on
biodiversity, including in the manufacturing sector, as well as considerable improvements in hazardous
and other waste management, and equipment for monitoring and analyzing environmental performance of
the manufacturing industry. However, awareness-raising efforts should continue to be pursued and the
capacity for EIA and monitoring environmental performance should be strengthened continuously, bearing
in mind the expansion of the manufacturing sector.

Over the last decade, the Cambodian economy has been shifting away from the agriculture, forestry and
fisheries sector towards manufacturing, more specifically to the garment industry, which represents the
largest portion of Cambodia's manufacturing sector and operates largely on the final phase of garment
production. This final phase includes turning yarns and fabrics into garments, as the country lacks a
strong textile manufacturing base. Agriculture is still important in rural areas, where most people depend
on paddy cultivation for subsistence. The toxic pollution from laundry factories and from the garment
sector, and diverse liquid and solid wastes continue to be important challenges in the manufacturing
industries.

With the adoption of the Green Growth Roadmap and following the recommendations of Rio+20,
Cambodia set to "develop a national strategy for greening industries: based on resource efficiency and 3R
strategies; and develop measures to strengthen the national environmental industry sector". "Green
manufacturing aims to reduce the amount of natural resources needed to produce finished goods through
more energy- and materials efficient manufacturing processes that also reduce the negative externalities
associated with waste and pollution"48.

As noted in the Green Growth Roadmap, interventions that can improve the environmental quality of
waste management include: environmental awareness campaigns on community levels; the identification
and monitoring of proper dumping sites; better enforcement; the education of youth on the importance of
the environment; control of the importation of second hand goods; and promotion of local-level self
governance and leadership to improve decentralized coordination of these efforts. There is also a need to
improve and effectively enforce the subdecree on solid waste management, applying not only to the
proper management of solid wastes and/or garbage, but also to the management of hospital waste,
industrial waste and other hazardous waste. Apart from sound management strategies, the RGC can also
look into wastetoenergy options including options for biodigesting or waste incineration.

The promotion of green businesses and green products should be continued so as to increase resource
efficiency and increase lifecycle approaches to production of commodities. This way, waste will not be
created in the first place. Such a change in products and services may be more labor intensive than

                                                               114
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

businessasusual, but it would also further employment generation, for instance, by promoting cleaner
products to ensure sustainable development of industry. For developing countries, facilitating the green
manufacturing processes can stimulate innovation and enhance international competitiveness, translating
into opportunities for increasing trade and global market share49. Furthermore, manufacturing green
products in specific sectors can enable developing countries to tap into growing international markets for
sustainable products.

2. Issues

The manufacturing sector is faced with a number of challenges, particularly as it relates to sustainability.
These challenges include: scarcity of fresh water, energy sources and other resources or raw materials;
inefficient uses of scarce resources entailing economic losses and accelerating resource depletion;
pollution (such as greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, particulate matter, and sulphur dioxide, among
others), which accelerates not only climate change, but also degrades ecosystems and causes health risks;
hazardous substances and wastes; and large amounts of energy consumption which continue to increase
with the expansion of the industry. Establishing some of these industries can take up a lot of space and
ends up promoting deforestation for urban development and roads; this is exacerbated in the cases where
the best technologies need to be acquired.

3. Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the issues relating to manufacturing industries:

         (a) Strategic objective 1: Assess the impact of manufacturing industries on genetic resources,
               species, habitats or ecosystems and related ecosystem services that are important for
               sustainable development and poverty reduction in Cambodia;

         (b) Strategic objective 2: Prevent and, as needed, reduce possible negative impacts of
               manufacturing industries on Cambodias important biodiversity components; and

         (c) Strategic objective 3: Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation of the
               actions under this theme.

The manufacturing industries under consideration greatly depend on biological resources (listed under the
strategic themes in Thematic Groups 1 and 2 of this NBSAP) as raw materials. When they are well
managed, they can be a source of funds for contributing to biodiversity budgets and trust funds, thus
enhancing the enabling environment (strategic themes under Group 3). When they are not well managed,
they can be a source of pollution and can lead to the overexploitation of biological resources and to
biodiversity loss. Thus, as recommended in the 2009 NSDS, raw materials should be used efficiently and
the remaining products recycled. The efficient use of materials means less waste generation.

Biotechnology and Biosafety

1. Background

As described in the Convention on Biological Diversity, biotechnology means any technological
application that uses biological systems, living organisms, or derivatives thereof, to make or modify
products or processes for specific use. Biotechnology has applications in medicine, agriculture, food
production, and non-food industrial uses of plants, as well as in environmental uses. "Modern
biotechnology", which is the application of (i) in vitro nucleic acid techniques, including recombinant
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and direct injection of nucleic acid into cells or organelles, or (ii) fusion of
cells beyond the taxonomic family, has been proposed in the past decades for use, among other
applications, to boost crop production and possibly solve the hunger issue in the world. Genetically
modified crops include crops with resistance to certain pests, diseases, stressful environmental conditions,
chemical treatments (e.g. herbicides), and spoilage during storage, or crops with improved nutrient
profile. However, these techniques have raised a lot of concerns regarding human health, conservation of
biodiversity, in particular genetic diversity.

Reports indicate that living modified organisms resulting from modern biotechnology (LMOs) or other
GMOs have not yet been introduced in Cambodia or are being developed domestically. However,
reportedly some foreign companies have expressed their intention to introduce LMO/GMO crops, such as
maize and rice, into the country.

                                                               115
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Cambodia acceded to the Convention on Biological Diversity in 1995. In Article 8(g), the Convention
calls Parties to "establish or maintain means to regulate, manage or control the risks associated with the
use and release of living modified organisms resulting from biotechnology which are likely to have
adverse environmental impacts that could affect the conservation and sustainable use of biological
diversity, taking also into account the risks to human health." In accordance with the Convention, each
Contracting Party has to take legislative, administrative or policy measures addressing the possible risks
from modern biotechnology.

At the time of the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, Cambodia did not have any protection measures in place
against living modified organisms and lacked capacity in the field of modern biotechnology. Thus the
NBSAP included strategical measures to develop modern biotechnology education and capacity,
including national biosafety legislation and action plan required to prevent environmental and health
hazards associated with the development, use and release of living modified organisms, and protect
indigenous biodiversity from living modified organisms.

After adoption of 2002 NBSAP, Cambodia acceded to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety in 2003. The
objective of the Protocol is to contribute to ensuring an adequate level of protection in the field of the safe
transfer, handling and use of living modified organisms resulting from modern biotechnology that may
have adverse effects on the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, taking also into
account risks to human health, and specifically focusing on transboundary movements.

Progress in relation to the Protocol includes:

         (a) The establishment of a biosafety clearing house in 2006 with the Ministry of Environment to
               enhance cooperation with line agencies, the private sector, academic institutions, and for
               sharing information with the CBD secretariat and other Parties to the Cartagena Protocol;

         (b) An extension in 2004 of the mandate of the National Biodiversity Committee to also cover
               biosafety issues, and the development of Guidelines50 for Risk Assessment and Risk
               Management of Living Modified Organisms;

         (c) In 2008, the adoption of a national law on biosafety51, and the development of a draft
               National Action Plan on Biosafety and Biotechnology;

         (d) The organization of a series of capacity-building training workshops for technical staff of
               relevant national and provincial institutions covering risk assessment and risk management
               resulting from LMOs, LMOs monitoring and management of biosafety, LMOs detection and
               monitoring, compliance and enforcement of transboundary movements of LMOs.52
               However, these workshops need to be better coordinated and organized more efficiently;

         (e) Establishment of a Secretariat of the National Steering Committee for Biosafety (NSCB),
               and the designation of a National Focal Point and the National Competent Authority for the
               Protocol, with the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fishery being the chairperson of the
               Scientific Advisory Team (SAT), as well as a National Focal Point for the Biosafety
               Clearing-House;

         (f) The Ministry of Environment organized several awareness-raising sessions including debates
               on TV, and produced materials for public awareness such as newsletters and brochures.
               Some materials such as the supplementary protocol were translated into Khmer; and

         (g) The country established a biotechnology laboratory for the identification and detection of
               LMOs imported into the country, so as to support decision-making for issuing import
               approval letters.

In 2010, the Conference of the Parties served as the meeting of the Parties to the Protocol adopted in
decision BS-V/16 of the Strategic Plan for the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety for the Period 2011-2020
and its multi-year programme of work, with the following strategic objectives: (i) facilitating the
establishment and further development of effective biosafety systems for the implementation of the
Protocol; (ii) capacity-building; (iii) compliance and review; (iv) information sharing; (v) outreach and
cooperation, to be implemented through a ten-year programme of work for the Protocol, supported by
biennial work plans. Parties were urged to align their biosafety national action plans and programmes and
their National Biodiversity Strategies and Action Plans with this Strategic Plan, and allocate adequate
human and financial resources so as to expedite the implementation of the Strategic Plan.

                                                               116
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

2. Issues

The following key issues were identified:

         (a) Limited capacity in the field of modern biotechnology
         (b) Public awareness, participation and education in biosafety

3. Strategic objective

The following strategic objective was adopted to address the identified issues.

Strategic objective 1: Further the implementation of the National Action Plan on Biosafety and
Biotechnology (2010-2014) and revise it in the context of the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety and its
Strategic Plan, and assess the contribution of these activities to the conservation and sustainable use of
biodiversity, sustainable development and poverty reduction in Cambodia.

Sustainable Tourism

1. Background

In Cambodia, tourism is the third largest economic sector after agriculture and the garment industry. This
sector is rapidly expanding, with the national revenue from tourism increasing 17-fold from USD 100
million in 1995 to USD 1,786 million in 2010, and generating 315,000 jobs in the same year53. The target
for the tourism sector, in terms of the number of tourist arrivals is 4.5 million by 2015, and 6.1 million
international tourists by 2018, while the target for domestic tourists is 10.5 million; which is equivalent to
the creation of 700,000 jobs54. Cambodia's potential for different types of sustainable tourism, including
ecotourism and green tourism is immense because of the countrys rich cultural and natural heritage. The
sustainable development of Cambodias tourism thereby relies greatly on the protection and preservation
of the countrys socio-cultural heritage and environment, and its biodiversity (landscapes, genetic
resources used for example in the culinary art, charismatic and endemic wildlife), in addition to the
development of environment-friendly infrastructures and human resources.

At the time of the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, Cambodia was aware of the potential impact of the
expanding tourism on its natural environment from wastes, pollution and habitat degradation caused by
unorganized tourism. Setting up and implementing some controls and guidelines for tourism were
recognized as necessary measures for keeping the environment as healthy and intact as possible. In 2002
Cambodia was also in the process of strengthening its network of protected areas and cultural sites with
the involvement of local communities as a way to contribute to the development of tourism. While
increased tourism is a target, it was also recognized that the building of new roads and hotels for tourists
would require care in order to prevent the negative impacts that these infrastructures would have on
landscapes and the integrity of natural ecosystems. Services associated with hotel activities would also
need to be well managed in order to prevent pollution and environmental degradation. In addition,
Cambodia was conscious of the need to raise public awareness and train tour operators and tourism
guides on the principles of sustainable and responsible tourism.

While focusing on the development of tourism activities that were respectful of the environment and that
met the needs and expectations of local communities, the 2002 NBSAP provided the following strategic
recommendations to:

         (a) Integrate biodiversity conservation and environmental management concerns into tourism
               policy and development plans and guidelines, including by subjecting tourism projects to
               social impact assessments and environmental impact assessments as prerequisite for granting
               authorization;

         (b) Develop ecovillage-based tourism and eco-tourism opportunities involving local
               communities; and

         (c) Integrate tourism and conservation of cultural heritage and nature by promoting tourism in
               protected areas, and monitor and manage the impacts of tourism in these areas.

Since the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, the Conference of the Parties to the CBD adopted the Guidelines
for Biodiversity and Tourism Development (Decision VII/14) that Parties are always encouraged to
apply, particularly in "tourism and conservation hotspots", areas where there is both significant

                                                               117
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

biodiversity and significant pressure or potential pressure from tourism (see COP 12 decision on
Biodiversity and Tourism Development in UNEP/CBD/COP/12/L. 23).

Cambodia made significant progress in improving the sustainability of the tourism sector:

         (a) Life-skills are part of the education curriculum to support tourism and other key economic
               sectors such as agriculture and information technology, in line with the Rectangular Strategy;

         (b) The Law on Tourism was promulgated in 2009. Its purpose in relation to biodiversity is to (i)
               govern the development of the tourism sector in a sustainable manner, effectively and
               qualitatively, and to reduce poverty; (ii) protect and conserve the natural resources, culture
               and customs, which serve as the foundation of the tourism sector; and minimize negative
               impacts while maximizing positive impacts of the tourism sector (Article 2);

         (c) The Ministry of Tourism (MOT) developed a strategic action plan for creating
               environmentally sustainable tourism, creating incentives for ecotourism development,
               including greencertification schemes for hotels, guesthouses and ecolodges. The criteria for
               ecotourism includes, among others, energyefficiency, composting, wastesegregation, use
               of renewables such as biogas, and use of locally produced organic rice and organic products55;

         (d) Community Based Tourism Development is being promoted to improve economic
               development and increase job opportunities;

         (e) In 2010, Cambodias Ministry of Tourism developed a National Ecotourism Policy and
               Strategic Plan, building on the understanding and appreciation of the important role that
               biodiversity plays in promoting Cambodia as an attractive destination56;

         (f) With the adoption of the National Forest Programme strategy in 2010, Cambodia is
               promoting and strengthening its management of protection forests, some of which are
               protected for eco-tourism, and is planning to integrate tourism development wildlife
               protection with sustainable harvesting of wildlife resources based on sound practices and
               results of scientific studies and researches. A set of rules and regulations, including
               population census, hunting season, harvest quotas, target species, trophy fees, royalties and
               hunting methods need to be developed in accordance with recognized national or international
               game hunting practices standards as well as knowledge of target species ecology.

2. Issues

The following key issues were identified:

         (a) Pollution and habitat degradation caused by unorganized tourism.

         (b) Public awareness and training of tour operators and tourism guides.

         (c) Construction that can take up a lot of space and promote deforestation for urban development and roads.

         (d) Lack of adequate technology, knowledge and poor planning.

3. Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues

         (a) Strategic objective 1: Gather biodiversity information of relevance to tourism development,
               including inventorying nature based-tourism sites;

         (b) Strategic objective 2: Prevent tourism activities from impacting biodiversity negatively and,
               as needed, apply corrective measures where tourism has negative impacts on Cambodias
               important biodiversity components;

         (c) Strategic objective 3: Strengthen measures relating to tourism that have a positive impact on
               biodiversity and thus enhance the benefits from biodiversity and associated ecosystem
               services to all in Cambodia ;

         (d) Strategic objective 4: Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation of the
               actions for a sustainable tourism.

It is obvious that actions under all the other strategic themes can have an impact on the development and
success of tourism in Cambodia.

                                                               118
                                                                          National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Table 21: Key actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their implementation under the theme on "Industry, Technology and
             Services (Manufacturing, Biotechnology and Biosafety, and Tourism)"

Strategic Objectives                                         Key Actions                                                                    Coordinating and
                                                                                                                                         participating ministries

                                                                                                                                                and agencies

Strategic objective 1:                                                      Manufacturing industries                                     MIH, GSSD, MAFF, MOI
                                                                                                                                         MOINF, MOP, MOE, MOC
Assess the impact of manufacturing industries on        1.1 Assess amount of waste and hazardous materials from manufacturing
genetic resources, species, habitats or ecosystems and        industries.                                                                MIH, MOE, MAFF, MOI,
related ecosystem services that are important for                                                                                        GSSD, MOP, MOINF, MOC
sustainable development and poverty reduction in        1.2 Document data and information related to the waste, air and wastewater
Cambodia.                                                     from the industrial sector.                                                MIH, MOE, MAFF, MOI,
                                                                                                                                         GSSD, MOP, MOINF, MOC
                                                        1.3 Document life-cycle of manufactured products.

Strategic objective 2:                                  2.1 Identify and describe the direct and indirect factors in manufacturing       MIH, MOE, MOI, MAFF,
                                                              industries that are causing these industries to have a negative impact on  GSSD
Prevent and, as needed, reduce possible negative              Cambodias important biodiversity components.
impacts of manufacturing industries on Cambodia's                                                                                        MIH, MOE MOI, GSSD
important biodiversity components.                      2.2 Apply measures to control the factors responsible of the negative
                                                              environmental impacts of manufacturing industries.

                                                        2.3 Restore the sites affected negatively by manufacturing activities.           MIH, MOE MOI, GSSD

                                                        2.4 Control industrial wastewater discharge in compliance with national and      MIH, MOE MOI, GSSD
                                                              international criteria and standards.

                                                        2.5 Control industrial solid waste and/or municipal waste disposal in            MIH, MOE MOI, GSSD
                                                              compliance with national and international criteria and standards.

                                                        2.6 Develop and disseminate guidelines for greening manufacturing industries,    MIH, MOE MOI, GSSD
                                                              including the development and implementation of environmental policies
                                                              for the respective manufacturing industries, based on resource efficiency
                                                              and the concept of 3R (reduce resources use and production of wastes; re-
                                                              use and recycle and thus be clean, without polluting the environment; and

                                                        119
                                                      National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                                      green, with preserving greenery, waterways and the natural heritages).

                                                 2.7 Establish expert teams to guide and assist with the greening of            MIH, MOE, MOI, GSSD
                                                       manufacturing industries.

                                                 2.8 Strengthen pollution control and monitoring on the industrial areas.       MIH, MOE, MOI, GSSD

                                                 2.9 Reduce the environmental impact of existing industries and ensure that the MIH, MOE,MOI, GSSD
                                                       new ones have a low ecological footprint.

                                                 2.10 Further mainstream biodiversity into the Green Growth Roadmap adopted     MIH, MOE, MOI, GSSD
                                                       by Cambodia in 2009 and in the Sustainable Development Goals.

                                                 2.11 Identify and apply incentive measures that will promote the greening of   MIH, MOE, MOI, GSSD
                                                       manufacturing industries.

                                                 2.12 Develop schemes for innovative environment-friendly investments.          MIH, MOE, MOI, GSSD

Strategic objective 3:                           3.1 Enforce the legislation and policies regulating the amount of waste and    MIH, MOE, GSSD
Strengthen the enabling environment for the            hazardous materials from manufacturing industries.
implementation of the actions under this theme.
                                                 3.2 Enhance awareness of environmental issues in the industry sector.          MIH, MOE, MOI, GSSD
;
                                                 3.3 Enhance awareness programs on Environmental Impact Assessment and          MME, MOE, MAFF, MOC,
                                                       Environmental Pollution Control and Monitoring System for the            GSSD
                                                       manufacturing sector.

                                                 3.4 Acquire equipment for monitoring and analyzing, and build a database.      MIH, MOE, GSSD

                                                 3.5 Develop measures to orient or discipline the behavior of private actors, so MIH, MOE, GSSD
                                                       as to promote compliance with sustainability criteria along the supply chain.

                                                 3.6 Build capacity through training workshops on:                              MIH, MOE, GSSD

                                                       a. The use of environmentally friendly processes in the manufacturing
                                                             sector (Indicator: number of companies reached through awareness;
                                                             campaign or number of participants in training workshops);

                                                 120
                                                                                            National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                                               b. The use of Environmental Management Systems (EMS) in medium and
                                                                    large size companies (Indicator: number of participants in training
                                                                    workshops and number of companies using EMS);

                                                               c. Establishing environmental management systems; and

                                                               d. Using Life Cycle Analysis tools.

                                                          3.7 Establish and use biodiversity-inclusive EIA procedure for new industrial       MIH, MOE, GSSD
                                                                development projects.

                                                          3.8 Promote environmental initiatives that are cost effective.                      MIH, MOE, GSSD
                                                                                                                                              MIH, MOE,GSSD
                                                          3.9 Adopt certification or ecolabelling systems and ISO standards. Develop
                                                                clean technologies. Develop and adopt 3R policy in manufacturing industries.  MIH, MOE, MOEYS,
                                                                                                                                              GSSD
                                                          3.10 Mainstream concepts of green manufacturing in education and training
                                                                programmes, including for universities, government officials and the
                                                                private sector.

                                                               Biotechnology and biosafety

Strategic objective 1:                                    1.1. Develop biosafety capacity-building action plans, well-coordinated at the      MOC, GSSD, MME, MOE,
                                                                  local and national levels, for implementing the Cartagena Protocol on       MAFF
Further the implementation of the National Action                 Biosafety and the Nagoya ­ Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol on
Plan on Biosafety and Biotechnology (2010-2014) and               Liability and Redress to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety57.             MOE, MME MAFF, MOC,
revise it in the context of the Cartagena Protocol on                                                                                         GSSD
Biosafety and its Strategic Plan, and assess the          1.2. Establish a national directory of human resources trained and/or working
contribution of these activities to the conservation and          on subjects concerning biotechnology and Biosafety, and assess capacity-    MOE, MME, MAFF,
sustainable use of biodiversity, sustainable                      building needs, including training and institutional needs.                 MOC, GSSD
development and poverty reduction in Cambodia.
                                                          1.3. Raise public awareness, and promote training, education and participation
                                                                  concerning the safe transfer, handling and use of living modified
                                                                  organisms (LMOs).

                                                          1.4. Establish regulatory (national biosafety legislation and related guidelines)   MOE, MME MAFF, MOC,
                                                                  and administrative (administrative rules and procedures for handling        GSSD
                                                                  notifications and requests for approval of imports of LMOs intended for
                                                                  direct use as food or feed, or for processing; contained use; and for

                                                          121
                                                                                                 National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                                      introduction into the environment) rules consistent with the Protocol

                                                 1.5. Establish a system for enforcement of the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety. MOE, MME, MAFF

                                                      Adopt and widely use guidance on risk assessment and risk management           MOC, GSSD

                                                 1.6. Integrate biosafety issues and the implementation of the Protocol into the     MOE, MME, MAFF GSSD,
                                                         relevant sectors                                                            MOC

                                                 1.7. Carry out research to provide relevant guidance on socio-economic              MOE, MME, MAFF, MOP,
                                                         considerations that may be taken into account in reaching decisions on the  MOC GSSD
                                                         import of living modified organisms

                                                 1.8. Mainstream biosafety into national development plans and relevant              MOE, MME, MAFF
                                                         sectoral policies, strategies and programmes, including development         MOP, MOC GSSD
                                                         assistance programmes

                                                 1.9. Mobilize additional financial resources and technical support for the          MOE, MME, MAFF, MEF

                                                      implementation of the Protocol, as one of the major prerequisites of           MOC, GSSD
                                                      successful implementation of activities planned in the Protocol and within

                                                      the overall framework of the Strategy for Resource Mobilization in support

                                                      of the Convention on Biological Diversity

                                                 1.10. Revise National Action Plan on Biosafety and Modern Biotechnology in a        MOE, GSSD MAFF, MEF
                                                         more pragmatic and implementable way, contributing to environmental         MOC
                                                         protection, biodiversity protection and taking into account risk to human
                                                         health

Strategic objective 1:                                                    Tourism                                                    MOT, GSSD MAFF, MOE
Gather biodiversity information of relevance to  1.1 Identify areas where there is both significant biodiversity and significant     MCFA

                                                       pressure or potential pressure from tourism58

                                                 122
                                                                                                                    National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

tourism development, including inventorying nature      1.2 Compile and manage, within the clearing-house mechanism, information on                 MOT, MOE MAFF
based-tourism sites                                           the status, value and location of the components of biodiversity of touristic         GSSD, MCFA
                                                              importance, and on measures taken to protect them and use them
                                                              sustainably. This information should come from all sources of knowledge,
                                                              including local and indigenous communities, scientists and citizens. It
                                                              should comprise:

                                                             a. Biodiversity resources, including protected areas and any special
                                                                  features and sites of particular importance, and threatened resources.
                                                                  This should include a review and monitoring of recreation, visitation
                                                                  and other tourism activities in protected areas, as well as impacts and
                                                                  relevant management processes in ecologically sensitive areas;

                                                             b. Culturally sensitive areas;

                                                             c. A review of national and other sectoral plans, policies and strategies
                                                                  relevant for tourism development and biodiversity;

                                                             d. Cultural, environmental and social impact assessments

                                                        1.3 Review legislation and policies relevant to biodiversity and tourism                    MOT, MOE, MAFF,

                                                             including, inter alia, assessment of the effectiveness of any measures for             GSSD, MCFA
                                                             resource management, access and/or ownership by communities, especially

                                                             indigenous ethnic minorities and local communities in relation to tourism development

                                                        1.4 Review the status and plans of the tourism sector, tourism policy and                   MOE, MAFF,GSSD, MOT,

                                                             tourism markets and trends, and their expected overall positive and possible MCFA

                                                             negative impacts, at the national and regional level.

                                                        1.5 Study the benefits from, and costs of, tourism to indigenous ethnic                     MOE, MAFF
                                                              minorities and local communities                                                      GSSD, MOT, MCFA

Strategic objective 2:                                  2.1 Apply the voluntary biodiversity-inclusive guidelines59 for strategic                   GSSD, MOE, MAFF, MOT
                                                              environmental assessment and environmental impact assessment when                     MCFA
Prevent tourism activities from impacting biodiversity        planning activities relating to tourism
negatively and, as needed, apply corrective measures                                                                                                GSSD, MOE, MAFF, MOT
where tourism has negative impacts on Cambodia's        2.2 Assess the impact of tourism on genetic resources, species, habitats or                 MCFA
important biodiversity components                             ecosystems and related ecosystem services that are important for
                                                              sustainable development and poverty reduction in Cambodia

                                                        123
                                                            National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                                       2.3 Identify and apply measures to reduce the negative impacts of tourism             GSSD, MOE, MAFF, MOT
                                                             activities                                                                      MCFA

                                                       2.4 Minimize the negative impacts of tourists on the biodiversity of tourism          GSSD, MOE, MAFF, MOT
                                                             attraction areas.                                                               MCFA

Strategic objective 3:                                 3.1 Identify the benefits of tourism to biodiversity and economic and social          MOT, MOE, MAFF, MEF
Strengthen measures relating to tourism that have a          development, bearing in mind that these benefits may take various forms,        MCFA GSSD
positive impact on biodiversity and thus enhance the         including: job creation, fostering local enterprises, participation in tourism
benefits from biodiversity and associated ecosystem          enterprises and projects, education, direct investment opportunities,
services to all in Cambodia                                  economic linkages and ecological services

Strategic objective 4:                                 3.2 Rehabilitate some natural and cultural sites to add value to the sites and        MOE, GSSD MAFF, MOT
Strengthen the enabling environment for the                  receive ecotourists.
implementation of the actions for sustainable tourism
                                                       3.3 Maximize the environmental, social and economic benefits from tourism,            GSSD, MOE, MAFF, MOT
                                                             including by carrying research projects for this purpose                        MCFA

                                                       4.1 Promote communication, education and public awareness activities for the          GSSD, MOE, MAFF, MOT
                                                             general public and tourists on sustainable travel choices, and on the use of    MCFA
                                                             eco-labels, standards and certification schemes, if appropriate.

                                                       4.2 Set up a national master plan to promote ecological tourism in protected          MOE, GSSD MAFF, MOT
                                                             area systems.                                                                   MLMUPC, MRD, MOP

                                                       4.3 Integrate biodiversity conservation and environmental management                  GSSD, MOE, MAFF, MOT
                                                             concerns into tourism policy and development plans and guidelines,              MCFA
                                                             including mandatory environmental impact assessments for tourism
                                                             development projects.

                                                       4.4 Integrate the conservation of cultural heritage and nature through the            GSSD, MOE, MCFA,
                                                             development of tourism programs in demarcated areas for protected area          MAFF, MOT
                                                             landscapes.

                                                       4.5 Encourage and support village-based tourism development program,                  GSSD, MOE, MAFF, MOT
                                                             including the inventory of potential projects, guidelines for nature-based      MCFA
                                                             tourism development, community approach strategies, promotion of local
                                                             products, conservation of historical sites and ecosystems, and promotion of

                                                       124
                                           National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

     cultural heritage and family values

4.6 In order to improve policy development and implementation, strengthen               GSSD, MOE, MAFF, MOT
      coordination among the various levels of decision-making in Government            MCFA
      departments and agencies concerned with the management of biodiversity
      and tourism, as well as agencies responsible for broader national economic
      development.

4.7 Support existing multi-stakeholder bodies (such as the Biodiversity Steering GSSD MOE, MAFF, MOT

     Committee and the Technical Working Group) so that they can promote                MCFA

     cooperation, effective dialogue and information-sharing with stakeholders,

     and play an effective role in resolving conflicts that might arise in relation

     to tourism and biological diversity.

4.8 Support the public and private sector to reach a united view on sustainable         MOT, GSSD MOE, MAFF
      tourism and develop master plans for sustainable tourism for key tourism
      destinations in Cambodia.

4.9 Integrate programmes on issues relating to tourism and biodiversity into            GSSD, MOE, MAFF, MOT
      education, capacity-building and awareness-raising.                               MOEYS MCFA MOP

4.10 Develop guidelines building on best/good practices for use in training and         GSSD, MOE, MAFF, MOT
      education programmes60.                                                           MOEYS MCFA

4.11 Regularly monitor the environmental impact of tourism activities, particularly in  GSSD, MOE MAFF, MOI
      protected areas, and develop management plans to address those impacts.           MCFA, MOT

4.12 Re-enforce institutional arrangements so as to provide for the                     GSSD, MOE, MAFF,
      comprehensive involvement of stakeholders in the management of tourism            MOT, MCFA
      that is respectful of biodiversity.

4.13 Increase the capacity for using biodiversity-inclusive EIA and SEA, and the GSSD, MOE, MAFF,

     Akwé: Kon Guidelines to evaluate the impact of tourism.                            MOT, MCFA

4.14 Develop and support community-based tourism and ecotourism.                        GSSD, MOE, MAFF, MOI,
                                                                                        MCFA, MOT

125
     National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

4.15 Build the capacity of national and subnational protected area and          MOE, GSSD, MAFF, MOI,
      conservation area agencies to engage in partnerships with the tourism     MCFA, MOT
      industry to contribute financially and technically to the operations and
      maintenance of protected areas through appropriate tools such as
      concessions, public-private partnerships, payback mechanisms and other
      forms of payments for ecosystem services, in complement to public
      budgetary allocations and without prejudice to public mandates and
      obligations toward achieving Aichi Biodiversity Target 11 and Cambodia
      Biodiversity Target 8.

126
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                     Theme 18: Resource Mobilization

1. Background

This theme is about strategic ways and means to mobilize the resources needed to advance the
conservation of biological diversity and the sustainable use of its components so as to achieve sustainable
development, poverty reduction, the Sustainable Development Goals and the well-being of the people in
Cambodia. This theme focuses on funding, while recognizing that money alone is not sufficient to
achieve the conservation of biodiversity and the sustainable use of its components as described in the
Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 and the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan adopted
by Cambodia in 2002. Thus, although the focus under this theme is on financial resources, it is
understood that resource mobilization includes also mobilization of human resources, the strengthening of
institutions, acquisition and use of new technologies, introduction of positive economic incentives,
enhanced engagement of business and other stakeholders, and equitable sharing of benefits from the
utilization of genetic resources.

For over a little more than two decades, various projects with significant capacity-building components61
have been carried out by bi- or multilateral organizations or by international NGOs. Many of them have
not achieved their capacity building objectives to the fullest and have had insufficient impact on the
conservation of biodiversity and the sustainable use of its components for the benefit of sustainable
development. As noted in the 3rd National Report, The UNDP/GEF supported the Cambodia National
Capacity Self-Assessment Project for Global Environmental Management, which identified gaps in terms
of national capacity to ensure effective management of the nations biodiversity.

Regarding financial resources, the 2002 NBSAP62 referred to financing under different themes such as
protected areas and community-based management. The Strategy called for financial sustainability, the
creation of favorable conditions for investors, an increase in the annual financial contribution of the
government while encouraging financial mobilization at the international level, and transparency in all
financial dealings related to natural resource exploitation.

An assessment of the implementation of the 2002 NBSAP twelve years after its adoption indicates that
insufficient financing is a major constraint to achieving its objectives. Lack of resources is also a main
obstacle in the achievement of the other biodiversity related conventions ratified by Cambodia. It is
therefore critical that the updated/revised strategy and action plan for biodiversity identifies the most
effective ways and means to mobilize the financial resources needed.

In 2008, the Conference of the Parties to the CBD approved a strategy for resource mobilization in
support of the achievement of the three objectives of the Convention and the 2010 biodiversity target. The
strategy is contained in the annex to decision IX/11 of the CBD Conference of the Parties. It aims to assist
governments and relevant organizations in enhancing international financial flows and domestic funding
for biodiversity, in order to achieve a substantial reduction of the current funding gaps in support of
biodiversity. The strategy takes into consideration a wide range of possible local, national, regional and
international funding sources, both public and private, and puts emphasis on the following during its
implementation: (i) efficiency and effectiveness, (ii) synergies, (iii) innovation, (iv) capacity-building, (v)
awareness-raising, (vi) gender and socio-economic perspectives. The strategy is articulated around 8
goals that provide a suitable framework for the actions that Cambodia has considered in its effort to
mobilize resources for the implementation of its revised NBSAP, which integrate the biodiversity
objectives of all the regional and global agreements it has ratified.

There are challenges to resource mobilization. However, Cambodia has already gained valuable
experience with resource mobilization for the 2002 NBSAP. The following are some of the opportunities
for future mobilization of financial resources:

         (a) Cambodia adopted policies, strategies and roadmaps that are favorable to the mobilization of
               resources for activities that support and lead to sustainable development and poverty
               eradication. For example, the Green Growth Roadmap developed by the Ministry of
               Environment (MOE) in 2009 is a supporting framework for environmentally sustainable and
               socially inclusive development and growth in Cambodia. This roadmap creates the basis for
               environmentally sound economic development through promotion of sustainable
               consumption and production, green business and greening the market, development of
               sustainable infrastructure, green tax and budget reform. The priority sectors identified in the

                                                               127
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

               strategy include agriculture, infrastructure, urban development, employment and the
               development of human resources. The roadmap also aims to align all relevant Ministries,
               institutions, NGOs, international organizations, development partners and academia to
               cooperate in addressing current challenges to sustainable development;

         (b) As part of the effort to increase resources for the implementation of CBD, a national capacity
               self-assessment (NCSA) accompanying an action plan for national capacity development
               regarding implementation of the 3 Rio Conventions was developed and adopted by the
               government in 2007. The Prime Minister63 made a call to those who care about biodiversity,
               land quality, climate change adaptation and mitigation, and poverty reduction to support the
               National Capacity Self-Assessment (NCSA) Action Plan and push for a long term plan;

         (c) There are major bilateral donors including Australia, Canada, China, Denmark, France,
               Germany, Japan, the Republic of Korea, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Sweden, the United
               Kingdom and the United States. However, as stated in the 5th National Report, a large part of
               the funds provided through bilateral agreement are used by NGOs or businesses from the
               respective donor country;

         (d) Various international NGOs are active in the region; to name a few: the Mekong River
               Commission (MRC), the World Fish Center and the ASEAN Regional Centre for
               Biodiversity Conservation (ARCBC);

         (e) Major multilateral donors include the United Nations (particularly UNDP), the European
               Union, the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank and the International Monetary Fund;

         (f) The Hollywood movie star, Angelina Jolie, has donated USD 10 million towards the
               biodiversity conservation project at Roneam Daun Sam and Samlaut Protected Areas;

         (g) Entry fees collected from visitors access to Biosphere Reserves and National Parks, as well
               as income from forest concession, fishery concession and fishing taxes will be placed in the
               national coffers and returned as annual budget allocation for the management of the
               respective areas.

2. Issues

In Cambodia, the main issues regarding the resources needed for the implementation of the updated
NBSAP are as follows:

         (a) Limited Government budget;

         (b) Low technology and lack of equipment;

         (c) Limited human resources; and

         (d) Language barrier.

3. Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues

         (a) Strategic objective 1: Enhance human resource development and engagement in biodiversity
               conservation and sustainable use;

         (b) Strategic objective 2: Make operational at the national level the Biodiversity Resource
               Mobilization Strategy adopted under the Convention on Biological Diversity;

         (c) Strategic objective 3: Strengthen the national technology capacity;

         (d) Strategic objective 4: Strengthen and enhance coordination of national institutions dealing
               with biodiversity issues.

Resource mobilization and capacity building are critical elements of the "enabling" cluster and as such
constitute a key component in almost every project.

                                                               128
                                                                                                 National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Table 22: Key actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their implementation under the theme on "Resource Mobilization"

Strategic Objectives                                 Key Actions                                                                               Coordinating and
                                                                                                                                                  participating
                                                                                                                                                 ministries and
                                                                                                                                                     agencies

Strategic objective 1:                               1.1. Building on previous national capacity assessments, assess the knowledge, skills MOE, GSSD,

Enhance human resource development and               and corresponding human resources required to implement this NBSAP.                       MAFF,MOEYS
engagement in biodiversity conservation and
sustainable use.                                     1.2. Organize consultation workshops to monitor and carry out a valuation of staff,       MOE, GSSD,
                                                           and describe the roles and responsibilities of Ministries, their                    MOEYS, MEF, MOP
                                                           departments/agencies and other stakeholders currently involved in the key actions
                                                           under the various themes of this Strategy.

                                                     1.3. Develop and implement a human resource strategic plan, bearing in mind the           MOE, MOP,
                                                           current capability of existing educational and training establishments, and taking  MOEYS, GSSD
                                                           into account the short term as well as long term needs for implementing the
                                                           actions identified in this NBSAP, the possibility of synergy among the strategic
                                                           themes, and the possibility of South-South and North-South cooperation that exist
                                                           to fill certain gaps in skills and expertise.

                                                     1.4. Develop a technology system for human resource management.                           MOE, GSSD

                                                     1.5. Promote budgetary allocations in national and relevant sectoral budgets for          MOE, GSSD MAFF,
                                                           human capacity building.                                                            MOP MOEYS

Strategic objective 2:                               2.1 Start assessing financial needs by calculating the full cost of implementing each     MOE, GSSD MAFF,
                                                          of the actions planned in the revised NBSAP, including an assessment of the          MEF
Make operational at the national level the                ecological, genetic, socioeconomic, scientific, educational, cultural, recreational
Biodiversity Resource Mobilization Strategy adopted       and aesthetic values of the important components of biological diversity.            MOE, GSSD MAFF,
under the Convention on Biological Diversity.                                                                                                  MEF
                                                     2.2 Identify institutions across multiple sectors and describe their specific role in
                                                          financing the actions planned in the NBSAP.

                                                     2.3 Undertake a reform of economic incentives that will promote the private/business MOE, GSSD MAFF,

                                                     sector engagement in conservation efforts.                                                MEF

                                             129
            National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

2.4 Collect information from relevant actors/investors/donors (including GEF) on           MOE, GSSD,
     budgets and expenditures for the actions identified under each of the themes in the   MAFF, MEF
     revised NBSAP, if possible across several years so as to gain a baseline overview
     of expenditures by institution and by key action.

2.5 Develop and implement a resource mobilization strategy through the following actions:  MOE, GSSD,
                                                                                           MAFF, MEF
     2.5.1  identify, screen and prioritize potential finance actors and biodiversity
     2.5.2  finance mechanisms; and assess how much funds each source can generate

     2.5.3  integrate considerations on biodiversity and its associated ecosystem
     2.5.4  services into national priorities and development plans by 2015, and
     2.5.5  thereby have the appropriate domestic financial provisions for biodiversity
            made in the budgets of those plans
     2.5.6
            develop an operational plan with the necessary steps and timeframes

            identify robust baselines if targets have to be determined in the strategy

            Mobilize domestic financial resources from all sources, including, inter
            alia, the public sector, the private sector, and through new and innovative
            financial mechanisms, to significantly reduce the gap between identified
            needs and available resources at domestic level, for effectively
            implementing by 2020 the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020.

            Innovative mechanisms that can be explored and used include, but are not
            limited to, the reduction or redirection of environmentally-harmful
            subsidies, notably those related to intensive agriculture; application of
            policy options for improved stewardship of the countrys natural capital,
            such as payments for ecosystem services, environmental fiscal reform,
            investments in ecological infrastructure, biodiversity offset mechanisms;
            access and benefit-sharing initiatives; environmental fiscal reforms
            including innovative taxation models and fiscal incentives for achieving
            the three objectives of the Convention; markets for green products;
            business-biodiversity partnerships and mobilization of international private
            sector contributions to biodiversity conservation through initiatives such as
            REDD+ , the Green Development Mechanism (GDM) initiative, Earth
            Fund initiative; new forms of charity; and some new funds under the
            UNFCCC such as the Adaptation Fund (the Least Developed Countries
            Fund (LDCF) and the Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF)),

     2.5.7 Establish the trust funds planned under the Environment Law, the
             Protected Areas Law, the Law on Forestry and the like.

130
                                                      National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                                 2.6 Develop and implement ways and means to reduce the economic costs of                      MOE, GSSD,
                                                      biodiversity loss, including by addressing the drivers of biodiversity loss.             MAFF, MEF

                                                 2.7 Ensure coordination among funding partners at the national, regional and                  MOE, GSSD,
                                                      international levels for efficiency and to avoid unnecessary duplication.                MAFF, MEF

                                                 2.8 Build the human capacity to carry out these activities and raise awareness in             MOE, GSSD,
                                                      support of resource mobilization, including strengthening capacities of relevant         MAFF, MEF
                                                      ministries and agencies to make the case for including biodiversity and its
                                                      associated ecosystem services in discussions with donors and relevant financial
                                                      institutions; promote budgetary allocations for biological diversity and its
                                                      associated ecosystem services in national and relevant sectoral budgets.

Strategic objective 3:                           3.1 Carry out a technology needs assessment for the implementation of this NBSAP              MOE, GSSD,
Strengthen the national technology capacity.           and assess the potential benefits, costs and risks of the identified technologies,      MAFF, MOEYS
                                                       with a view to ensuring that acquired technologies are economically viable,
Strategic objective 4:                                 socially acceptable and environmentally friendly.
Strengthen and enhance coordination of national
institutions dealing with biodiversity issues.   3.2 Create an enabling environment, including policies, human capacities, research            MOE, GSSD,
                                                       institutions, cooperation/networking and budgets, for technology development,           MAFF, MOEYS
                                                       acquisition and adaptation, building on actions for implementing Articles 16 to
                                                       19 as well as the related provisions of the CBD.

                                                 3.3 Develop, acquire and adapt technologies that are relevant to the conservation of          MOE, GSSD,
                                                       biodiversity and the sustainable use of its components, and that do not cause           MAFF, MOEYS
                                                       undesirable damage to the environment, building on ongoing initiatives and
                                                       programmes, for instance, under other conventions and international agreements, with a
                                                       view to maximizing synergies and avoiding unnecessary duplication.

                                                 4.1 Inventory the institutions dealing with biodiversity at the local and national            MOE, GSSD,
                                                       levels, including for research, education and other types of training (universities     MAFF, MOEYS,
                                                       and specialized centers), information storage and dissemination (e.g., CHM,             MOP
                                                       BCH), policy development and implementation, legislation and law enforcement,
                                                       planning, designing, monitoring and environmental impact assessment.

                                                 4.2 Identify and implement ways and means to strengthen complementarity and                   MOE, GSSD,
                                                       synergy among these institutions.                                                       MAFF, MOEYS,
                                                                                                                                               MOP

                                                 131
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                   Theme 19: Community Participation

1. Background

At the time of the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, a number of pilot projects were underway applying
community-based natural resource management (CBNRM) principles to forestry and fisheries in different
regions of the country. In 2001, for example, the Government undertook a fishery reform policy whereby
some 500,000ha of prime commercial fishing grounds were turned over to local communities for their
management. The success of these projects demonstrated that CBNRM is indeed an extremely valuable
option to address problems of rural poverty and biodiversity conservation and sustainable use. As a result,
the government decided to expand the CBNRM approach beyond fisheries and forestry into other sectors
including land-use planning, wildlife management, protected areas, tourism and agriculture. In protected
areas and protected forests, due to the limited number of rangers and the importance of the protected
resources to local livelihoods, the Government increasingly engaged community groups in the protection
and sustainable management of protected areas and protected forest resources. Various biodiversity
conservation measures, in particular for adaptation to climate change, are to be implemented at the
community level for success and cost-effectiveness.

Community participation implies the regular involvement of members of the community (that is, local
authorities, women, youth, elders, communal and religious leaders, members of the indigenous ethnic
minority groups, non-governmental organizations and the private sector) in natural resources planning,
decision taking and policy-making, implementation, monitoring and reporting processes through multi-
stakeholder consultations.

In order to ensure the success of CBNRM, support must be provided to building environmental
awareness, understanding and empowerment, particularly in rural communities, and to helping people
organize their communities. Legal and institutional frameworks are needed to support and enforce the
communities' rights to use and protect their resources. Incentives and financial resources are also usually
needed.

Knowing this, the NBSAP focused on addressing the following: (i) insufficient participation and
involvement of the population and the private sector in biodiversity resource protection and management;
(ii) lack of trained staff and of government capacity to undertake CBNRM; and (iii) limited financial
support for CBNRM.

More specifically, the 2002 NBSAP targeted:

         (a) The development of community-based natural resource management programs for forestry,
               fisheries, land-use, protected areas, wildlife in particular threatened species protection, ex
               situ conservation, wildlife management, and agriculture; and

         (b) Implementation of legal, economic and other incentive measures promoting the contribution
               and participation of the different stakeholders to the conservation and sustainable use of
               biodiversity, including through strengthening institutional training in community-based
               natural resource management.

After the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, Cambodia embarked on the process of decentralization and
democratization, including the establishment of elected Commune Councils in early 2002. Active
community groups were identified and supported to improve their capacity to interact with the Commune
Councils, while at the same time seeking ways for the Commune Councils to support the different groups.
The Ministry of Rural Development (MRD) undertook a programme for the development of indigenous
ethnic minorities and local communities in order to enhance the quality of life of their members, as well
as maintain their traditional culture, customs and beliefs.

Building on the decentralization and democratization processes set forth in the 2004 Rectangular
Strategy, both MOE and MAFF have been promoting and encouraging the participation of local
community members and ethnic minority groups in meetings, seminars and workshops to provide ideas
and comments on the management of natural resources. MOE and MAFF developed the necessary
guidelines and encouraged the local people living in and around the protected areas and protected forests
to create community protected areas (CPA) and community forestry (CF). The number of CPAs created
by and under MOE increased from 3 CPAs in 1999 to 120 CPAs in 2013. The number of CFs under
management of FA/ MAFF is 453. The Community Fisheries Network, the Community based Eco-

                                                               132
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

tourism Network, and the Network of Participatory Land-use planning were also established64. Co-
management with the full participative involvement of local people throughout the process, from planning
through to the monitoring of achievements, has become a fundamental principle in the implementation of
strategies relating to biodiversity conservation and sustainable development. This principle is included in
various strategies adopted by Cambodia such as the Strategic Planning framework for fisheries, the
Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014-2023, the eco-village65 concept, and the Green Growth
Roadmap.
However, capacity-building and financial support for CBNRM are limited. These limitations have
slowed down the development of community-based programmes. Also there is no data on the
development of the community based wildlife protection programmes.
2. Issues
The following key issues were identified:

         (a) Insufficient participation and involvement of the population and private sector to biodiversity
               resource protection and management.

         (b) Lack of trained staff and of government capacity to undertake CBNRM.
         (c) Lack of financial support for CBNRM.
3. Strategic objective
The following strategic objective was adopted to address the identified issues:
Strategic objective 1: Enhance effective and efficient community participation in natural resource

                           management.
The success in implementing conservation and the sustainable use of biological resources and ecosystem
services under the themes in Thematic Groups 1 and 2 and in implementing the CBD Articles 8(j), 10(c)
and related provisions will require the effective participation of local communities and indigenous ethnic
minorities who depend directly on biodiversity. Within the CBD and other biodiversity-related
conventions, indigenous and local communities have been acknowledged as being key partners in
achieving the goals of these treaties, and their knowledge, innovations and customary sustainable use
practices as being essential for efficient, sustainable and economic ecosystem management, also for the
conservation of biodiversity including genetic diversity. In addition, resource mobilization; awareness ­
raising and education; coordination of work for landscape and seascape management; respect of
traditional knowledge, know-how and practices; the provision of the Nagoya Protocol; and knowledge
sharing and information exchange will all support the participation of communities in the implementation
of this NBSAP. The full and effective participation of indigenous ethnic minorities and local
communities, at all relevant levels of the integration of traditional knowledge in the implementation of the
Convention and this NBSAP is part of the Cambodia Biodiversity Target 17.

                                                               133
                                                                                                                National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Table 23: Key actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their implementation under the theme on "Community Participation"

Strategic Objectives                                Key Actions                                                                 Coordinating and participating
                                                                                                                                     ministries and agencies

Strategic objective1:                               1.1. Document the effectiveness of community participation, and assess      MAFF, MOE, MRD, MLMUPC,
                                                         the level of socioeconomic benefits gained by village development      MOWA, MOP
Enhance effective and efficient community                committee (VDC) community members from their participation in
participation in natural resource management.            natural resource management, and develop guidelines building on
                                                         best practices.

                                                    1.2. Strengthen institutional training in community-based natural resource  MAFF, MOE, MRD, MLMUPC,
                                                         management, in particular for sustainable forest management,           MOWA, MOP
                                                         sustainable agriculture and animal production, sustainable fisheries
                                                         and aquaculture, sustainable protected area system management and
                                                         tourism, sustainable energy biomass production, and water resources
                                                         management.

                                                    1.3. Develop community based wildlife protection programs.                  MAFF, MOE, MRD and MOWA

                                                    1.4. Develop community based forestry programs.                             MAFF, MRD, MOE, and MOWA
                                                    1.5. Develop community based agriculture programs.                          MAFF, MRD and MOWA

                                                    1.6. Develop community based fisheries and aquaculture programs.            MAFF, MRD, MOE and MOWA

                                                    1.7. Develop community based land-use and rural development programs. MLMUPC, MRD, MOP, MPWT,
                                                                                                                                                 MOE, MAFF and MOWA

                                                    1.8. Develop community based protected areas and conservation areas. MOE, MAFF

                                                    1.9. Develop community based ecotourism.                                    MOE, MAFF MOT

                                                    1.10 Develop community based production and utilization of biomass for MOE, MAFF MME
                                                    energy

                                               134
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

       Theme 20: Awareness, Education, and Research Coordination and Development

1. Background

As stated in the countrys Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP), education is a crucial factor in
human development. It contributes in myriad ways to poverty reduction, including by providing
awareness to better make use of opportunities for economic progress. This sector is therefore accorded
high-priority in RGC's development agenda. Increasing public awareness and an understanding of the
importance of biodiversity is an essential element in guaranteeing the effectiveness of measures to
achieve the conservation and sustainable use of the natural capital sustaining life and human well-being in
Cambodia. In order to be efficient, awareness and education activities have to be supported by adequate
scientific research and documentation. For efficiency and enhanced synergy, and in the framework of the
ecosystem approach or similar approaches, the research being carried out by various bodies within the
government, knowledge institutions and non-governmental organizations need some coordination.

Environmental education in Cambodia had a relatively short history at the time of the adoption of the
2002 NBSAP. The most notable government activities of relevance began with the establishment of the
Ministry of Environment (MOE) and the Inter-ministerial Steering Committee for Environmental
Education (IMSCEE) in 1993. Activities directly or indirectly related to biodiversity included training
seminars and capacity building workshops, production of manuals on environmental education for
primary school teachers, TV spots, posters, and conducting a national environment day. A department of
environmental sciences was opened at the Royal University of Phnom Penh in 2001 to undertake research
on environmental issues. Ministries and other institutions also had opportunities to undertake research on
biological resources. It was the governments intention to better coordinate the development of such
research activities between ministries and university departments.

Despite its short history, environmental education received both technical and financial assistance from
the United Nations and other international organizations. In addition to the initiatives in the formal
education sector, different ministries, international organizations, international and local NGOs were also
carrying out environmental activities in the non-formal education sector to promote community-based
environmental learning and activities or using educational tools to promote better forestry and agricultural
practices. The geographical scope of these activities, however, was limited. There was a need to expand
these activities to cover the whole country and reach everyone, especially local communities living in
high biodiversity areas and areas that hosted threatened species. In ministries, training activities were
mainly needed at the technical and managerial level in forestry, agriculture, fisheries, wildlife and
protected area management.

The focus of the 2002 NBSAP was therefore on the (i) shortage of manpower and expertise in the field of
biodiversity and sustainable resource management, to be addressed through training programmes on
environment conservation and management of natural resources; (ii) weak integration of biodiversity and,
in general, environmental concepts in educational curricula and materials; (iii) insufficient awareness and
understanding of biodiversity issues and related laws, particularly among local communities who required
translated educational and awareness materials into Khmer; (iv) weak national research activities,
particularly at the Royal University of Phnom Penh, mainly due to limited financial resources and the lack
of technical training for Government staff in biodiversity management. A National Biodiversity
Research, Training, Information Center and Library was identified as a solution among others.

Since the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP:

Regarding awareness-raising:

         (a) The Ministry of Environment is carrying out an awareness programme on biodiversity,
               climate change, and biosafety66; the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries regularly
               conduct debates on animal production, fisheries and forestry protection. The Ministry of
               Tourism, the Ministry of Rural Development, the Ministry of Interior, provincial authorities
               and various NGOs are implementing several awareness and training programmes on
               biodiversity conservation at different locations. Due to limited human and financial
               resources, the last large scale national environmental education and awareness campaign was
               organized in 2005 as part of the GEF supported Tonle Sap Environmental Management
               Project (TSEMP);

         (b) National Biodiversity Day, International Wetland Day, World Water Day, National Fish Day

                                                               135
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

               and National Tree Planting Day are celebrated annually throughout the country to enhance
               awareness.

Regarding education

        (a) Building on the Royal Governments 2003-2015 "Education for All" Plan, MOEYS is
               integrating environmental issues, especially biodiversity and ecology, into national school
               curriculum. The objective is to upgrade knowledge and skills, and to change student
               behavior regarding biodiversity conservation and sustainable use, while demonstrating its
               value to human health, agriculture (e.g. home garden, rice cultivation, string bean growing,
               organic vegetables, mushroom farm, fish, frog and chicken raising), forestry (timber and
               non-timber forest products), water resources, tourism and sustainable development. The
               Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and the UNDP are particularly active in
               assisting Cambodia in incorporating an environmental education programme into primary
               and secondary school curricula. A range of train-the-trainer materials on environmental
               topics have been developed and used; many training materials have also been developed in Khmer.

        (b) The government has also substantially increased the budget for the education sector and
               achieved remarkable progress in improving cooperation in education with development
               partners including NGOs and the private sector.

        (c) At least three of the universities in Cambodia, namely the Royal University of Agriculture,
               the Royal University of Phnom Penh, and Prek Agricultural College, offer courses in life
               sciences, including biology, fisheries, forestry, animal production, veterinary sciences, land-
               use, and microbiology. Masters degrees in biodiversity conservation and related fields are
               also available.

        (d) Even with limited resources, the Department of Early Education and Care (DEEC) and other
               organizations have also been conducting a range of formal and informal education activities
               in the field with local communities and the media. MOE has even developed a new local
               language website ­ www.moe.gov.kh. It is considered, however, that without a vision and
               consistent unifying messages, the effectiveness of these environmental education activities is
               greatly diminished.

Regarding research development and coordination,

The Government and partner organizations are conducting programmes that include the establishment of
three research and development institutes to address issues in the agriculture, fisheries and forestry
sectors; namely the Cambodian Agricultural Research and Development Institute, the Forest
Development and Research Institute, and the Inland Fisheries Development and Research Institute.
Moreover, various research centers have been operating particularly for the above three sectors.

It is important to note that there are a lot of awareness-raising, training and research activities under other
strategies, plans and programmes of relevance to biodiversity (e.g. under the NFP Strategy notably at the
Forest -Wildlife Research and Development Institute (FWRDI), the 2009 National Green Growth
Roadmap or the Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014-2023) that are not listed here. Work
under this theme needs to be well coordinated with these activities for effectiveness, synergy and efficient
use of limited resources.

2. Issues

The following key issues were identified:

         (a) Lack of awareness and understanding of biodiversity issues among local people;

         (b) Limited extension services and facilities devoted to environmental awareness;

         (c) Limited integration of environmental concepts in educational curricula;

         (d) Shortage of manpower and expertise in the field of sustainable resource management;

         (e) The infancy of basic research in all fields of natural resources protection and sustainable use;

         (f) Lack of funding for environmental education and research;

         (g) Lack of environmental training and education materials in Khmer; and

         (h) Gaps in the Biodiversity Status Report.

                                                               136
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

3. Strategic objectives
The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues

         (a) Strategic objective 1:Enhance biodiversity awareness at all levels of society, including
               through facilitated access to relevant information; also strengthen existing channels and
               create new ones that will facilitate targeted awareness programmes aimed at key audiences
               such as rural communities and indigenous ethnic minorities, community elders, the private
               sector, staff in relevant Ministries and at provincial level, parliamentarians, women, the
               youth and media;

         (b) Strategic objective 2: Strengthen education and training programmes on biodiversity and
               related issues so as to achieve a critical mass of educated, skilled, talented, capable people
               for the implementation of this NBSAP and related strategies and plans;

         (c) Strategic objective 3: Support biological, ecological and socioeconomic research in the
               fields of plants, animals and microorganisms from terrestrial, marine and other aquatic
               habitats, and the ecosystems of which they are a part, and ensure adequate coordination of
               this research so as to take full advantage of complementarities and synergies.

These strategic objectives and the key actions identified below will enable Cambodia to implement
Article 12 and 13 of the Convention on Biological Diversity, the relevant decisions taken by the CBD
Conference of the Parties under Communication, Education and Public Awareness (CEPA) and regarding
capacity building for the implementation of the Convention, the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-
2020 and the actions under all the themes of this NBSAP. Progress on activities carried out to achieve this
Target will facilitate the delivery of other targets associated with the NBSAP. Likewise, if other targets
are achieved such as Cambodia target 3 (on the integration of biodiversity values into national and sub-
national development and poverty reduction strategies and planning processes), target 17 (on traditional
knowledge), target 19 (on the establishment of an interoperable and user-friendly information system) and
target 2 (on resource mobilization), they will likely facilitate awareness-raising of biodiversity.

                                                               137
                                                                              National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Table 24: Key actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their implementation under the theme on "Awareness, Education, and
             Research Coordination and Development"

Strategic Objectives                                             Key Actions                                                                                Coordinating and
                                                                                                                                                               participating
                                                                                                                                                              ministries and
                                                                                                                                                                  agencies

Strategic objective 1:                                           1.1 Undertake a survey of peoples awareness of biodiversity so as to develop               MOE, GSSD, MOEYS
                                                                      baseline information on awareness.
Enhance biodiversity awareness at all levels of society                                                                                                     MOE, GSSD, MOEYS,
including through facilitated access to relevant                 1.2 Develop and implement a Communication, Education and Public Awareness                  MAFF, MIME,
information; also strengthen existing channels and                    (CEPA) strategy for Biodiversity, building on the CEPA strategy of the CBD,           MLMUPC, MOH,
create new ones that will facilitate targeted awareness               specifying the target audiences (whose awareness should be raised), the types of      MCR and MOWA
programmes aimed at key audiences such as rural                       activities (how awareness should be raised), and the scale of the activity (by
communities and indigenous ethnic minorities, community               how much awareness should be raised).                                                 MOE,GSSD, MOEYS,
elders, the private sector, staff in relevant Ministries and at                                                                                             MAFF, MIME,
provincial level, parliamentarians, women, the youth and         1.3 Strengthen biodiversity awareness programmes (including mass media                     MLMUPC, MOH,
media                                                                 campaigns, biodiversity web site, national biodiversity day, high-level events,       MCR and MOWA
                                                                      publications, posters, TV and radio spots and documentaries, workshops, as
                                                                      much as possible targeted to specific groups/sectors, in collaboration with
                                                                      national NGOs and universities) and ensure coordination with similar
                                                                      awareness-raising activities being undertaken under other relevant strategies,
                                                                      plans and programmes for effectiveness, synergy and efficient use of limited
                                                                      resources.

                                                                 1.4 Establish a National Biodiversity Research, Disseminate, Training and                  MOE, GSSD, MOEYS
                                                                      Information Center and Library.

                                                                 1.5 Further develop the Biodiversity Status Report by collecting taxonomic data in         MOE, GSSD, MAFF
                                                                      all the groups of biodiversity components, as well as in all the representative       and MOEYS
                                                                      areas of Cambodia, and develop the capacity needed for these activities.

Strategic objective 2:                                           2.1. Mainstream environmental and biodiversity issues into the curricula at all levels     IMSCEE, MOEYS and
                                                                      of education, not only under biological sciences but also under other natural         MOE,GSSD, MAFF
Strengthen education and training programmes on                       sciences such as physics and chemistry, and under human sciences in particular
biodiversity and related issues so as to achieve a critical           social sciences and economics, and ensure coordination with similar training
mass of educated, skilled, talented, capable people for               and education activities being undertaken under other relevant strategies, plans and

                      138
                                                        National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

the implementation of this NBSAP and related            programmes for effectiveness, synergy and efficient use of limited resources
strategies and plans

                                                        2.2. Strengthen capacity of Government staff and staff from any relevant agencies in MOE, GSSD and

                                                        biodiversity conservation, sustainable use and management                              MAFF

                                                        2.3. Set up training programs on the management and conservation of natural            MAFF,MOE, GSSD
                                                             resources, targeting members of communities who depend directly on                MOEYS
                                                             biodiversity as a priority.

Strategic objective 3:                                  3.1. Develop and coordinate biodiversity research programs for efficiency in the       RUPP, RUA
                                                             country, and more specifically at the Royal University of Phnom Penh, ensuring
Support biological, ecological and socioeconomic             coordination with research activities being undertaken under other relevant
research in the fields of plants, animals and                strategies, plans and programmes for effectiveness, synergy and efficient use of
microorganisms from terrestrial, marine and other            limited resources including: the NFP strategy, the 2009 National Green Growth
aquatic habitats, and the ecosystems of which they are       Roadmap or the Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014-2023
a part, and ensure adequate coordination of this
research so as to take full advantage of
complementarities and synergies

                                              139
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                          Theme 21: Legislation and Institutional Structure

1. Background

At the time of the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, the legal coverage of biodiversity related issues was
inadequate and poorly enforced, and the public was not much aware of the legislation related to the
environment. As such, the existing legislation concerning biodiversity was under revision, with by-laws
and regulations related to the 1996 Law on Environmental Protection and Natural Resource Management
being prepared, for example.

Thus, the 2002 NBSAP focused on the following strategic objectives and actions

         (a) Adoption of legislation, bylaws and regulations related to biodiversity issues, such as
               protected areas, endangered species, biosafety, water protection, pesticide control, property
               rights, community-based natural resource management, and land-use planning; clarification
               of ministerial jurisdiction and overlap prevention; and national campaign for raising
               awareness of environmental legislation;

         (b) Law enforcement through adequate incentive measure;

         (c) Implementation of Environmental Impact Assessment guidelines and institutional capacity
               building for applying EIA;

         (d) Implementation of regional and international biodiversity obligations from MEA;

         (e) Provision of support to the Biodiversity Steering committee and Secretariat with the mandate
               of coordinating NBSAP implementation.

Since the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP,

         (a) Cambodia has passed many new laws including the Forestry Law (2002), Land Law (2003),
               Fisheries Law (2006), Water Resource Management Law (2007), Protected Areas Law
               (2008), Biosafety Law (2008), Law on Crop Seed Management and Rights of Plant Breeders
               (2008) and related regulations67, however there is still limited implementation and
               enforcement;

         (b) Cambodia ratified a number of international and regional agreements that are being
               implemented at a relatively slow pace due to limited financial resources. There is a strong
               need for synergies in the implementation of these commitments to guarantee complementary
               and mutual reinforcement. Stronger synergies at the national level will minimize the
               unnecessary duplication of efforts, it will avoid contradictions and make for a more efficient
               use of the available resources.

         (c) The roles and responsibilities of key ministries have been clarified but some roles still
               overlap;

         (d) Public awareness on legislation has been improved;

         (e) After EIA law was promulgated, a series of capacity building activities had been organized
               to strengthen institution, however more training is still needed.

2. Issues

The following key issues were identified:

         (a) Inadequate management standards in the different activity sectors

         (b) Overlap, fragmentation and inadequate co-ordination between authorities responsible for the
               protection, conservation and management of resources

         (c) Inadequate legal coverage of biodiversity related issues

         (d) Lack of public awareness on legislations related to the environment

         (e) There is a need to strengthen existing institutions and mechanisms that will ensure effective
               law enforcement.

                                                               140
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

3. Strategic objectives
The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues:

         (a) Strategic objective 1: Promote an effective and coherent implementation of policies and
               legislations relating to biodiversity.

         (b) Strategic objective 2: Strengthen existing national and regional institutions addressing
               biodiversity issues.

The long-term conservation, sustainable use and management of biological resources and ecosystems (see
themes under Groups 1 and 2) require stable institutions and legal and policy frameworks that are
supported by monitoring, as well as extension, awareness-raising, capacity-building, and sustainable
financing programmes (Group 3 themes).

                                                               141
                                                                          National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Table 25: Key actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their implementation under the theme on "Legislation and Institutional
             Structure"

                      Strategic Objectives                   Key Actions                                                                              Coordinating and
                                                                                                                                                         participating
Strategic objective 1:                                                                                                                                  ministries and
Promote an effective and coherent implementation of                                                                                                         agencies
policies and legislations relating to biodiversity.
                                                             1.1 Compile legislations, strategies, plans and programmes relating to biodiversity,     MOE, GSSD, MAFF
                                                                  and develop "Tematea68 like" issue-based modules that will facilitate coherent      and MOC
                                                                  and coordinated actions and implementation at the national and regional levels,
                                                                  and that will reinforce cross-sectoral understanding and cooperation.

                                                             1.2 Develop or, as appropriate, amend by-laws and regulations on biodiversity            MOE, GSSD, MAFF
                                                                  related issues in order to meet newly identified threats to biodiversity, such as   and MOC
                                                                  biosafety, species at risk, intellectual property rights, and clarify ministerial
                                                                  roles and responsibilities.

                                                             1.3 Implement an institutional capacity-building project on Environmental Impact         MOE
                                                                  Assessment.

                                                             1.4 Undertake national awareness campaigns on environmental legislation.                 MOE

Strategic objective 2:                                       2.1 Support institutional structures (such as CHM and BCH) at the national level,        MOE, GSSD
                                                                  and establish and strengthen similar structures at the regional (in particular in
Strengthen existing national and regional institutions            the context of the Agreement on the Cooperation for the Sustainable
addressing biodiversity issues.                                   Development of the Mekong River Basin) and global levels to facilitate
                                                                  implementation of the CBD and biodiversity-related conventions in a
                                                                  participatory and coherent way, building on the ecosystem approach.

                                                             2.2 Establish and support institutions relating to the implementation of the Nagoya      MOE, GSSD
                                                                  Protocol, and the acquisition and adaptation of technology of relevance to
                                                                  biodiversity conservation and sustainable use.

                                                             2.3 Strengthen the National Council for Sustainable Development and other                MOE,GSSD
                                                                  interministerial structures established through the various laws and policies that
                                                                  govern the conservation and sustainable use of biological resources and
                                                                  ecosystems.

                                                        142
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                           Theme 22: Quality of Life and Poverty Reduction

1. Background

Poverty reduction is the foremost priority of the Government of Cambodia. As stated in the 2010
Cambodia Millennium Development Goals (CMDG) report, Cambodia reduced poverty by about 17
percentage points over a period of 13 years. Over the three-year period from 2004 to 2007, poverty was
reduced from 35% to 30%, at a rate of about 1.2% per year (with an average growth in GDP of 11% per
year over this period). Over this period, the Cambodian economy has experienced a profound structural
transformation including its integration into the global economy and a shift of jobs from agriculture to
manufacturing. Economic growth over the past decade had been driven mostly by the garment,
agriculture, tourism, and construction industries, with the garment industry constituting about 65% of
exports.

The National Poverty Reduction Strategy: 2003-2005, the National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP)
2006-2010 and its 2009-2013 Update, which is also the countrys latest poverty reduction strategy and the
roadmap for achieving the CMDG, note that the achievement of poverty reduction is only possible with
political and social stability, rule of law, critical reforms in public administration, infrastructure
development, and balanced and equitable macro-economic growth, as planned in the Rectangular Strategy
for Growth, Employment, Equity and Efficiency in Cambodia. As a result, in the past two decades,
Cambodia has been addressing poverty reduction and the improvement of quality of life both at the policy
and macro-economic levels, and at the level of direct interventions focused on the poorest populations.

While poverty has decreased substantially over the past 13 years, a third of the population still lives
below the poverty line. The average rate of rural poverty is 35%, surpassing the 1% rate of Phnom Penh
and the 22% rate of "other urban" areas. These inequalities are due to the high rates of growth largely
centered on urban activities in recent years. A major challenge of the NSDP is therefore to adopt
strategies and actions that accelerate poverty reduction in rural areas. Such strategies are typically
developed as social and economic responses to poverty; however they need to be developed differently,
taking into account environmental considerations including biodiversity, in the same way that
environmental (biodiversity) management needs to take into consideration social and economic aspects in
order to support poverty reduction and sustainable development.

Under this theme, we consider only the role of biodiversity, including ecosystem services and their
management (conservation and use) in poverty reduction and in improving the quality of life. Biodiversity
can be considered as the totality of genes, species, and ecosystems of a region and it thereby includes all
the genetic resources, microorganisms, and plant and animal species, and ecosystems that are providing
the goods and services that are critical to our well-being.

The 2005 Millennium Ecosystem Assessment as well as the Intergovernmental Platform on Biodiversity
and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) provide conceptual frameworks linking biodiversity and its associated
services to human well-being and poverty reduction69. Human well-being consists of having multiple
components, including basic materials for a good life (such as adequate livelihoods, sufficient nutritious
food, shelter, and access to goods), freedom of choice and action (expressed as the opportunity to be able
to achieve what an individual values doing and being), health (including access to clean air and water),
good social relations (including social cohesion, mutual respect and the ability to help others), and
security (personal safety, access to secure resources and security from disasters). Poverty is also
multidimensional and has been defined as the pronounced deprivation of well-being. Ecosystems are
essential for human well-being for their role as provisioning (the products people obtain from ecosystems,
such as food, fuel, fiber, fresh water, and genetic resources), regulating (the benefits people obtain from
the regulation of ecosystem processes, including air quality maintenance, climate regulation, erosion
control, regulation of human diseases, and water purification), cultural (the nonmaterial benefits people
obtain from ecosystems through spiritual enrichment, cognitive development, reflection, recreation, and
aesthetic experiences), and supporting (services that are necessary for the production of all other
ecosystem services, such as primary production, production of oxygen, and soil formation) services.

The management of ecosystems and, in general, of biodiversity will influence how biodiversity and its
ecosystem services will affect the well-being of Cambodians. The performance of Cambodia under all the
themes of the NBSAP will determine how biodiversity will contribute to poverty reduction and quality of
life in Cambodia in the coming years. It will be necessary to particularly take into account how the
benefits from economic growth will be shared between urban and rural areas.

                                                               143
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

In Cambodia, an overwhelming majority of the population depends upon agriculture, fishery and forestry
as major sources of livelihood, with most local farmers relying upon subsistence farming and foraging.
The average rural household obtains food and generates income through a combination of activities such
as farming, hunting, fishing and the gathering of wood and non-forest products. Other supplemental
sources of livelihood include livestock raising; primary processing of agricultural, forestry and fishery
products; odd jobs and vending. Despite the continuous efforts of the Government to conserve and protect
the environment and the natural resource base, there are serious cases of resource depletion and
degradation. In the past thirty years, intensive logging and the illegal extraction of timber have led to a
drastic reduction in forest cover, from about 90% forest cover to less than 50% of the land base. In turn,
these intensive rates of deforestation have created land erosion problems and a higher incidence of
flooding, leading to the loss in fertile soils and crops. In the agricultural sector, the inappropriate use of
pesticides is leading to the contamination of waters and fish habitats, and to the degradation of other
aquatic resources. The over harvesting of wildlife has led to the near extinction of valuable food sources,
including several species of wild animals and plants. The construction of dams and other water
management infrastructures is a constant menace to the integrity of fish habitats. Industrial and urban
pollution is threatening the quality of life of the human population.

Realizing the full potential of Cambodian agriculture can make a significant contribution to poverty
reduction and enhanced quality of life. This will require very large investments in rural infrastructure,
agricultural extension and business development services, increased food processing to international
standards, increased vocational training in agriculture, an appropriate trade policy and linkages to
markets.

At the time of adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, the 1997 Socio-economic Survey of Cambodia indicated that
36% of the population was living below the poverty line. The 2002 NBSAP highlighted the need for better
planning and management of biological resources in order to improve living conditions and reduce poverty
by addressing the following issues:

         (a) Poverty and limited support for alternative livelihoods of rural people

         (b) Unsustainable harvesting of key subsistence resources

         (c) Degradation of habitats providing staple food and commodities

Therefore in order to reduce poverty (objectives and actions), Cambodia decided to strategically monitor
and analyze poverty, and formulate a poverty reduction strategy. Cambodia also undertook:

         (a) Community-based capacity-building programs in rural communities;
         (b) Environmental awareness programs to improve living conditions;
         (c) To increase family income by providing means to farmers for improving agricultural

               productivity;
         (d) To improve living conditions through medical care, hygiene, clean water and sanitation

               programs;
         (e) To promote opportunity for poor people to access basic education, adult literacy, informal

               education (number of students in the programs);
         (f) To promote economic development through infrastructure and micro-credit programs.

The Cambodian government also pays specific attention to the welfare of the indigenous ethnic minorities
in Cambodia. The Ministry of Rural Development developed a National Policy on Indigenous
Development, including indigenous rights to use the land that indigenous communities occupy. There has
been significant growth in community-based natural resource management programs across forestry,
fisheries, and protected areas, and also including participatory land-use planning approaches. MLMUPC
has also been implementing programmes with relevant ministries to provide awareness to the rural
population on the sustainable use of natural resources.

Cambodias present performance in relation to the CMDGs is mixed and uneven. It is likely that
Cambodia will not be able to meet all the CMDGs by 2015, unless its national efforts are further
strengthened and are supplemented and reinforced through global support. Cambodias progress towards
the CMDGs is constrained by many impediments, of which two critical ones are the chronic shortage of
investment funds and poor access to international markets, especially markets in developed countries,
despite its entry into the WTO.

                                                               144
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

2. Issues
The following key issues were identified:

         (a) Poverty and limited support for alternative livelihoods for the rural population depending
               mainly on agriculture, with limited access to and ownership of agricultural land and with
               limited access to other natural resources such as forest- and fishery-related resources

         (b) Unsustainable harvesting of key subsistence resources
         (c) Degradation of habitats providing staple food and commodities
         (d) High population growth, inadequate opportunities, and high vulnerability of rural

               communities
3. Strategic objectives
The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues

         (a) Strategic objective 1: Enhance the contribution of biodiversity conservation, the sustainable
               use of its components and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the
               utilization of genetic resources to poverty reduction and the Cambodia
               Millennium/Sustainable Development Goals

         (b) Strategic objective 2: Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation of the
               actions that will enhance the quality of life for all in Cambodia and contribute to poverty
               reduction.

Actions considered under all the themes of this strategy will contribute to the achievement of poverty
reduction and to the maintenance of a high quality of life in Cambodia.

                                                               145
                                                                                                                      National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Table 26: Key actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their implementation under the theme on "Quality of Life and Poverty
             Reduction"

Strategic Objectives                                           Key Actions                                                                            Coordinating and
                                                                                                                                                         participating
                                                                                                                                                        ministries and
                                                                                                                                                            agencies

Strategic objective 1:                                         1.1. Assess the environmental and socioeconomic benefits from biodiversity             MAFF, MOE
                                                                    conservation and sustainable use initiatives in all relevant economic sectors.    MAFF, MOE
Enhance the contribution of biodiversity conservation, the
sustainable use of its components and the fair and             1.2. Support and encourage biodiversity conservation and sustainable use initiatives
equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of       that yield substantial benefits and thus contribute significantly to improving
genetic resources to poverty reduction and the Cambodia             quality of life and poverty reduction in Cambodia.
Millennium/Sustainable Development Goals

                                                               1.3. Promote and support community-based natural resource management programs          MAFF, MOE,
                                                                    in agriculture, forestry, fisheries, protected areas, and land-use, including     MRD, MLMUPC,
                                                                    women's capacity building.                                                        MOWA, MOEYS

                                                               1.4. Environmental awareness programs in rural areas.                                  MOE, MAFF,
                                                                                                                                                      MRD, MLMUPC
                                                                                                                                                      MOEYS, MOWA

                                                               1.5. Carry out poverty monitoring and analysis programs on a regular basis, using      MOP
                                                                    participatory poverty assessment.

                                                               1.6. Integrate biodiversity perspectives in the implementation of the Poverty          MOP, MEF
                                                                    Reduction Strategy and Cambodia Millennium Development goals relating to
                                                                    poverty reduction.

                                                               1.7. Bearing in mind that Cambodias poverty is rooted in its large agricultural        MOP, MRD
                                                                    sector, which has low productivity and low growth but provides livelihood to the
                                                                    vast majority of the countrys population, carry out research to improve
                                                                    agricultural productivity and disseminate the best practices to enhance
                                                                    agricultural production and revenues/incomes, as well as food security and rural
                                                                    livelihoods.

                                                               1.8. Ensure the provision of rural drinking water supply services.                     MOP, MRD

                      146
                                                                                                                     National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                                            1.9. Ensure the provision of rural sanitation services.                                   MOP, MRD,MOH

Strategic objective 2:                                      2.1 Mobilize financial resources for the above-listed actions and strengthen human        MOE, MAFF,
                                                                 and institutional capacities, including through communication, education and         MRD, MLMUPC,
Strengthen the enabling environment for the                      other types of training, public awareness and health services.                       MOEYS, MOI
implementation of the actions that will enhance the
quality of life for all in Cambodia and contribute to       2.2 Develop and implement environmental awareness programs in rural areas.                MOE, MAFF,
poverty reduction                                                                                                                                     MRD, MLMUPC,
                                                                                                                                                      MOEYS, MOI

                                                            2.3 Promote the creation of green jobs and provide support based on the                   MOE, GSSD,
                                                                 conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, particularly in the water sector,  MAFF, MRD,
                                                                 agriculture, forestry, fisheries, energy and tourism sectors, as a way to expand     MLMUPC,
                                                                 job opportunities, improve rural livelihoods and reduce vulnerability of local and   MOEYS, MOI
                                                                 indigenous communities, in line with the countrys priority poverty reduction
                                                                 actions;

                                                       147
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

               Theme 23: Landscape and Seascape Management and Coordination

1. Background

In 2000, the world community endorsed the ecosystem approach as the primary framework for the
management of biodiversity70. The ecosystem approach is a strategy for the integrated management of
land, water and living resources that promotes conservation and sustainable use in an equitable way. This
approach, supported by 12 principles, takes into account all the components that are present and
interacting within the ecosystem, as well as the structure, processes, functions and interactions taking
place within the ecosystem. It is important to bear in mind that biodiversity consists of plants, animals,
microorganisms and ecosystems of which they are part, and that ,,ecosystem' means a dynamic complex
of plant, animal and micro-organism communities and their non-living environment interacting together
as a functional unit.

The activities of all sectors affect biodiversity and can contribute to, or detract from, the conservation of
biodiversity, the sustainable use of its components and ecosystem services, and the fair and equitable
services from the utilization of genetic resources. Thus, most problems relating to biodiversity
management are complex, with many interests from various stakeholders, a wide range of interactions
among the ecosystem components, and side-effects and implications, and should therefore involve the
necessary expertise and stakeholders at the local, national, regional and international level, as appropriate.
Principle 12 of the ecosystem approach provides a framework for fostering greater involvement of all the
relevant stakeholders, fostering technical expertise in planning and carrying out coordinated activities,
sharing management resources, or simply exchanging information. In addition, in accordance with
Principle 1 of the ecosystem approach, different sectors of society view ecosystems in terms of their own
economic, cultural and societal needs. Thus the integrated management of land, water and living
resources requires increased communication, cooperation and coordination (i) between sectors, including
in particular agriculture, fisheries, forestry, garments, tourism, energy, transport and judicial sectors in
Cambodia, (ii) at various levels of the Government (national, provincial, local), (iii) among and within
ministries, (iv) with civil society and private sector stakeholders, and (v) at the regional and international
levels. Procedures and mechanisms should be established to ensure the effective participation of all the
relevant stakeholders and actors during the consultation processes, decision making on management goals
and actions, and in implementing these goals and actions.

It is also important to bear in mind that ecosystems are open systems and that they are often connected to
other ecosystems. This open structure and connectedness of ecosystems ensures that effects on ecosystem
functioning are seldom confined to the point of impact or only to one system. Thus in accordance with
Principle 3 of the ecosystem approach, the effects of management interventions or of any decisions not to
intervene will not be confined solely to the point of impact, they will be felt in adjacent areas,
downstream, at great distances linked by migratory species systems, and even well into the future.

Bearing in mind that the ecosystem approach is based upon the hierarchical nature of biological diversity,
characterized by the interaction and integration of genes, species and ecosystems, which function at a
range of spatial and temporal scales, according to Principle 7 of the ecosystem approach, management
will be defined operationally within the boundaries of this nested hierarchy by users, managers, scientists
and indigenous and local peoples,. Connectivity between areas should be promoted where necessary.
Management processes and institutions should be designed to match the scales of the aspects of the
ecosystem being managed. More importantly, perhaps, given that ecosystem components and processes
are linked across scales of both space and time, management interventions need to be planned to
transcend these scales.

Given that the definition of ecosystem approach does not specify any particular spatial unit or scale, it has
been difficult for many to capture the concept in their work on the ground. Therefore, some organizations
put forward other approaches in line with the ecosystem approach that are more familiar to people
working on the ground, such as the landscape approach.

Landscape71 including seascape comprises the visible features of an area of land, including the physical
elements of landforms such as mountains or hills, rivers, lakes, ponds and the sea; and living elements of
land cover including indigenous vegetation, different forms of land-uses including agricultural lands,
buildings and other structures. Combining both their physical origins and the cultural overlay of human
presence, often created over millennia, landscapes reflect the living synthesis of people and place vital to
local and national identity. In other words, landscapes and seascapes72 can be described as dynamic

                                                               148
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

mosaics of habitats and land-uses where the interaction between people and nature is necessary for the
harmonious maintenance of biodiversity, while providing humans with the goods and services needed for
their livelihoods, survival and well-being in a sustainable manner. Landscape and seascape provide a
wide range of provisioning, regulating, cultural and supporting services. They also root the identities of
indigenous peoples and local communities, who are keepers and managers of biodiversity.

Land constitutes Cambodias most precious resource. Land reform has been vital to enhancing social
stability, developing an efficient land market, achieving environmental sustainability, and increasing
agricultural productivity. It is agreed that security of land tenure in a transparent and equitable manner
allows for proper land management and poverty reduction by giving citizens access to financial markets
by using their land titles as collateral. The intrinsic, aesthetic and intangible values of Cambodias
biodiversity through its rural landscape, with environmental and natural resources are high. The rural
landscape is heavily represented in much of the local artwork from the bas-reliefs of the Angkorian-era to
the artists of today. This landscape is also a cornerstone of Khmer proverbs, especially as they relate to
the Tonle Saps ecosystem role as the ,,beating heart of the country.

Thus, a landscape approach73 looks across large, connected geographic areas to more fully recognize
natural resource conditions and trends, natural and human influences, and opportunities for resource
conservation, restoration, and development. It seeks to identify important ecological values and patterns
of environmental change that may not be evident when managing smaller, local land areas. It provides an
important foundation for developing coordinated management strategies with partner agencies and
stakeholders, and should thus be applied from the planning stage through to monitoring and reporting.
The landscape and seascape approach encompasses the concepts of integrated watershed management,
river basin management, and coastal area management, which integrate multidisciplinary approaches to
the management of biophysical, social, and economic issues affecting water resources and their uses. The
widely adopted Integrated Natural Resource Management (INRM) approach, including the Integrated
Production and Protection (IPP) crop management, and Integrated Pest Management (IPM), is
conceptually defined as "the responsible and broad-based management of the land, water, forest and
biological resource base-including genes-needed to sustain agricultural productivity and avert degradation
of potential productivity."

At the landscape/seascape level, management of biodiversity will typically require cooperation and
collaboration among many line ministries including the Ministry of Environment (MOE), the Ministry of
Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries (MAFF), the Ministry of Water Resources and Meteorology
(MOWRM), the Ministry of Mines, and Energy (MME), the Ministry of Land Management, Urban
Planning and Construction (MLMUPC), the Ministry of Rural Development (MRD), the Ministry of
Womens Affairs (MOWA), the Ministry of Interior (MOI), the Ministry of Health (MOH), the Ministry
of Commerce (MOC), the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF), Cambodias Chamber of Commerce
(CCoC), and the Ministry of Tourism (MOT). As noted in the Green Growth roadmap, environmental and
social issues are crosscutting and thereby require multisectoral cooperation.

Good governance is essential for the successful application of landscape and seascape management. It
will ensure intersectoral cooperation. Good governance includes sound environmental, resource and
economic policies and administrative institutions that are responsive to the needs of the people. Robust
and sound resource management systems and practices are required to support these policies and
institutions. Decision-making should account for societal choices, be transparent and accountable and
involve society (Based on Ecosystem Approach decision VII/11).

As a member of the International Partnership on the Satoyama Initiative, Cambodia supports the
Satoyama Initiative dealing with socioecological production landscapes and seascapes (SEPLS) found in
many places in the world under different names and deeply linked to local culture and knowledge.

2. Issues

The following key issues were identified:

         (a) Loss of native species;

         (b) Habitat fragmentation;

         (c) Limited coordination among stakeholders;

         (d) Ecosystem approach and its 12 principles are not widely known and applied;

                                                               149
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

         (e) Coordination and cooperation among stakeholders and indigenous and local communities are
               limited; and

         (f) Information about landscapes and seascapes is limited.
3. Strategic objectives
The following strategic objective was adopted to address the identified issues.
Strategic Objective 1: Improve landscape and seascape management and coordination for efficient,
enhanced and synergistic conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity components
The implementation of actions relating to ,,Landscape and Seascape Management and Coordination
(Table 27) will benefit from the activities carried out to enhance community participation and
participatory approach, supported by legislation and institutional structures such as the National
Biodiversity Steering Committee. These actions will also benefit from the CHM that is facilitating
technical and scientific cooperation, knowledge sharing and information exchange and from actions under
many other themes, in particular the theme of ,,Awareness, Education, Research Coordination and
Development. These actions will also contribute to the design and implementation of protected area
systems, adequate management of mining, wise use of biological resources, as well as water resources
including in the tourism sector.

                                                               150
                                                                                                        National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Table 27: Key actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their implementation under the theme on "Landscape and Seascape
             Management and Coordination"

Strategic Objectives                                  Key Actions                                                                               Coordinating and
                                                                                                                                          participating ministries and

                                                                                                                                                      agencies

Strategic Objective 1:                           1.1. Map landscapes/seascapes and characterize their structures, functions and           MOE, GSSD, MAFF, MRD,
                                                      management practices used. Mapping of landscapes/seascapes includes an              MOWRAM, MOEYS, MME,
Improve landscape and seascape management             assessment of their socioeconomic and cultural values and identification of the     MTC, MOT, MLUP, RUPP
and coordination for efficient, enhanced and          main stakeholders, as well as making the information available on the CHM, as
synergistic conservation and sustainable use of       appropriate.                                                                        MOE, GSSD, MAFF, MRD,
biodiversity components.                                                                                                                  MOWRAM, MOEYS, MME,
                                                                                                                                          MTC, MOT, MLUP, RUPP
                                                 1.2. Facilitate the development of partnerships and engagement among the main
                                                      stakeholders and sectors, and facilitate the full and effective participation of
                                                      indigenous peoples and local communities and other stakeholders including
                                                      experts.

                                                 1.3. Mobilize adequate financial resources and technologies needed for assessing and     MOE, GSSD, MAFF, MRD,
                                                      effectively managing landscapes/seascapes.                                          MOWRAM, MOEYS, MME,
                                                                                                                                          MTC, MOT, MLUP, RUPP

                                                 1.4. Promote better understanding of the ecosystem approach through programmes of        MOE, MAFF, MRD,
                                                      communication, education and public awareness.                                      MOWRAM, MOEYS, MME,
                                                                                                                                          MTC, MOT, MLUP, RUPP

                                                 1.5. Initiate and facilitate as appropriate capacity-building, technology transfer, and  MOE, GSSD, MAFF, MRD,
                                                      awareness-raising to assist in landscape/seascape management.                       MWRM, MOEYS, MME, MTC,
                                                                                                                                          MOT, MLUP, RUPP

                                                 1.6. Monitor and review to allow adaptive management.                                    MOE, MAFF, MRD, MWRM,
                                                                                                                                          MOEYS, MME, MTC, MOT,
                                                                                                                                          MLUP, RUPP

                                                 1.7. Develop the capacity to broker negotiations and trade-offs, and manage conflicts    MOE, GSSD, MAFF, MRD,
                                                      among relevant stakeholder groups in reaching decisions about management, use       MWRM, MOEYS, MME, MTC,
                                                      and conservation of biological resources.                                           MOT, MLUP, RUPP

                                                 151
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

      Theme 24: Clearing-House Mechanism for Technical and Scientific Cooperation,
                            Knowledge Sharing and Information Exchange

1. Background

Paragraph 3 of Article 18 of the CBD calls for the establishment of a clearing-house mechanism (CHM),
at the first meeting of the Conference of the Parties, to promote and facilitate technical and scientific
cooperation. The CHM mission has been further specified, in decision X/15 of the CBD Conference of
the Parties, as that of a tool that will significantly facilitate the implementation of the Convention on
Biological Diversity and its Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020. It will do so through effective
information services and other appropriate means that promote and facilitate scientific and technical
cooperation, knowledge sharing and information exchange, and by establishing a fully operational
network of national clearing-house mechanisms for the effective provision of information services that
will facilitate the implementation of the national biodiversity strategies and action plans, and partners.

Cambodia established its CHM in 2011 with the mandate "to provide the efficient exchange of
information on biodiversity in Cambodia between involved persons and institutions", and to "facilitate
international access to information on the status of biodiversity studies and biodiversity management in
Cambodia". Thus the Cambodia CHM contains:

         (a) A few publications relating to the Convention on Biological Diversity including the 2002
               NBSAP, national reports under the CBD, and a few laws in both English and Khmer on
               Environmental Protection and Management of Natural Resources, on Protected Areas,
               Fisheries, Forestry, Land, and on the Control of Air Pollution and Noise Disturbances. The
               following are available in English-only: the 2007 Law on Water Resources Management,
               and the Sub-decree on Environmental Impact Assessment Process;

         (b) A frame for lists of events and for activities (not yet operational);

         (c) Links (not yet operational) to the Convention on Biological Diversity, the Strategic Plan for
               Biodiversity 2011-2020, the Aichi Biodiversity Targets, the Nagoya Protocol, The Cartagena
               Protocol on Biosafety, the Nagoya-Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol;

         (d) Biodiversity information about Cambodia consisting of a country profile, ecosystem profile,
               species database (to be updated) and national reports; and

         (e) Links to the websites of collaborators: only the Asian Center for Biodiversity (ACB) and
               Partnerships in Environmental Management for the Seas of East Asia (PEMSEA).

2. Issues

The following key issues were identified regarding the Clearing-House Mechanism of Cambodia:

         (a) Not clearly needs-driven and not updated regularly;

         (b) Not structurally decentralized and little structure to promote scientific and technical
               cooperation;

         (c) Limited information stored;

         (d) Apparently, no BCH or Nagoya Protocol clearing-house; and

         (e) No Khmer language.

3. Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues

         (a) Strategic Objective 1: Improve access to and generation of information;

         (b) Strategic Objective 2: Improve the use of information and knowledge; and

         (c) Strategic Objective 3: Increase the availability of financial, technical and human resources
               for the clearing-house mechanism.

                                                               152
                                                                                                                 National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Table 28: Key actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies under the theme on "Clearing-House Mechanism for Technical and Scientific
             Cooperation, Knowledge Sharing and Information Exchange"

Strategic Objectives                                                              Key Actions                                                      Coordinating and
                                                                                                                                                      participating
                                                                                                                                                     ministries and
                                                                                                                                                         agencies

Strategic Objective 1:                         1.1. Develop a harmonized information management system.                                            MOE, GSSD,
                                               1.2. Develop a common clearing-house mechanism.                                                     MAFF, MI
Improve access to and generation of
information.                                                                                                                                       MOE, GSSD, MI

                                               1.3. Strengthen existing stakeholder platforms in order to increase stakeholder engagement.         MOE, GSSD,
                                                                                                                                                   MAFF

                                               1.4. Increase contents to include, in addition to national reports and NBSAPs, country profiles,    MOE, GSSD,
                                                    biodiversity values, status and trends, as well as appropriate legislations, including those   MAFF
                                                    regarding the operation and functioning of the CHM such as ownership of information made
                                                    available, scientific and technological information such as on the management of
                                                    biodiversity, traditional knowledge with the prior consent of the holders, financial sources,
                                                    expertise and human resources in general, also information of relevance to Biosafety
                                                    Clearing-House (BCH) and Nagoya Protocol clearing-house.

                                               1.5. Increase the interactivity and interoperability of the CHM.                                    MOE, GSSD,
                                                                                                                                                   MAFF

                                               1.6. Ensure translation in Khmer.                                                                   MOE, GSSD,
                                                                                                                                                   MAFF

Strategic Objective 2:                         2.1 Pilot innovative tools for decision-making using the economic valuation of the use of natural MOE, GSSD,
Improve the use of information and knowledge.
                                               resources.                                                                                          MAFF

                                               2.2 Strengthen the capacity of existing national implementing institutions on negotiation skills.   MOE,GSSD,
                                                                                                                                                   MAFF

                                               153
                                                        National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Strategic Objective 3:                             2.3 Develop and disseminate a unified reporting process on the implementation status and      MOE, GSSD,
                                                        common format for information input.                                                     MAFF
Increase the availability of financial, technical
and human resources for the clearing-house         2.4 Develop the CHM in a way that it serves decision-makers at all levels well.               MOE, GSSD,
mechanism                                                                                                                                        MAFF
                                                   2.5 Increase the amount and nature of data stored in the CHM and their transformation into
                                                        knowledge for users.                                                                     MOE, GSSD,
                                                                                                                                                 MAFF
                                                   3.1 Create and support CHM nodes in participating institutions.
                                                                                                                                                 MOE,GSSD,
                                                   3.2 Enhance awareness about CHM and its usefulness for planning and decision-making on        MAFF

                                                        biodiversity use and management.                                                         MOE,
                                                                                                                                                 GSSD,MAFF
                                                   3.3 Build human capacity inter alia through training on information systems technologies,
                                                                                                                                                 MOE,
                                                        including training of local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities.                GSSD,MAFF,
                                                                                                                                                 MOEYS
                                                   3.4 Promote research projects, including inventories and taxonomic work, and publications on
                                                                                                                                                 MOEYS, MOE,
                                                        biodiversity issues.                                                                     GSSD, MAFF

                                                   3.5 Assess financial needs and mobilize the needed funds through various means, internal as   MOE, GSSD,
                                                                                                                                                 MAFF, MEF
                                                        well as external.
                                                                                                                                                 MOE, GSSD,
                                                   3.6 Increase the multidisciplinarity of the CHM steering committee.                           MAFF

Implementing this strategic objective will:

         (a) Support the implementation of the objectives under all the other themes and the Cambodia Biodiversity Targets. The Clearing-House Mechanism
               will gather, organize and facilitate the wide access and use of data, information and knowledge relating to all aspects of biodiversity including
               enabling measures;

         (b) Also support the achievement of Cambodia Target 19, through which by 2020, an interoperable and user-friendly information system containing data
               and information on biodiversity values, functions, status and trends, threats, and the consequences of its loss will have to be established and
               maintained for wide sharing among stakeholders.

                                                   154
                                                                                   National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

V. SUPPORT MECHANISMS FOR IMPLEMENTATION

In order to have an effective, sustained and successful implementation of the NBSAP, there is a need to
create a favorable political, legal, administrative and socio economic environment and to strengthen the
countrys human, technological, institutional and financial capacity relating to biodiversity issues. The main
overarching frameworks that are laying the groundwork to ensure a successful NBSAP include: the
Governments Rectangular Strategy (2009-2013), the 2003 Cambodian MDGs and forthcoming sustainable
development goals, the National Strategic Development Plan for 2006-2010, the 2009 National Sustainable
Development Strategy, the National Environmental Action Plan and the 2009 Green Growth Roadmap. These
frameworks include, for example, systems and processes built on decentralization, deconcentration, rule of
law, and incentives for performance. They support accountability, transparency, participation,
responsiveness, marginalized and disadvantaged societal groups, and encourage investment, coordination
across agencies and sectors, as well as capacity building. In addition, in the past decade, Cambodia adopted
strategies, plans of action and laws (see Annex 1) of relevance to the conservation and sustainable use of
biodiversity and sustainable development.

5.1 Cambodia Biodiversity Targets 2015 ­ 2020

The NBSAP consists of 498 identified key actions to achieve 78 strategic objectives under 24 themes. The
targets were developed by the Technical Working Group prior to the updating of the 2002 NBSAP and were
revised during the process of finalization of the updated NBSAP.

While it is necessary to implement all these actions to ensure that, "by 2050, Cambodias biodiversity and its
ecosystem services would have been valued, conserved, restored where necessary, wisely used and managed
so as to ensure equitable economic prosperity and improved quality of life for all in the country", the
management of such a large number of key actions can be problematic. Twenty specific targets, some of
which are measurable, were defined to streamline the implementation of the NBSAP. The Cambodia
Biodiversity Targets presented in Table 29 should therefore serve as a platform that promotes coherence,
coordination, cooperation, co-evolution and synergy, while maximizing resource use and efficiency in
implementing the key actions. The set of Cambodia Biodiversity Targets encourages a concerted
implementation of actions, many of which have already been adopted as part of strategies and plans for
sustainable development and as part of various sectoral plans and programmes. In view of creating synergies
and partnerships in the implementation of the NBSAP, the Cambodia Biodiversity Targets will facilitate
cooperation and the creation of concrete collaborative programmes and activities among the different
Ministries and their Departments, and among different actors (including members of local communities and
indigenous ethnic minorities, representatives of the private sector, or local authorities) within and across
sectors, and among organizations at the national, regional and international levels..

5.2 Roles and responsibilities in the implementation of the targets and the NBSAP

In consultation and agreement with all the NBSAP stakeholder groups, MOE will build an institutional
framework that will govern partnerships, cooperation, coordination and synergies among partners, with a
clear description of their accepted roles, responsibilities and expectations. Existing institutional structures
will be identified and strengthened and new ones established, as needed, for the implementation of the
NBSAP.

Interministerial Biodiversity Steering Committee and National Secretariat for Biodiversity

As a starting point, MOE will mandate and support the Interministerial Biodiversity Steering Committee
(IBSC) and the National Secretariat for Biodiversity (NSB) to:

         (a) Guide and coordinate the implementation of the NBSAP, focusing on the Biodiversity Targets,
               including monitoring, reviewing and reporting as well as providing recommendations for
               NBSAP revision. The Committee could guide on priorities in the implementation of the targets
               based on effectiveness of action (i.e. prioritizing actions with immediate impacts on the ground);
               costs and impact (starting with actions having zero or negative costs, then actions having a

                                                               155
                                                                                   National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

               relatively low cost but high impact, and finally actions that are expensive to carry out especially
               if their impact is limited); or multiplying effect (starting with actions that can simultaneously
               help achieve other targets);

         (b) Propose the clarification of ministerial jurisdictions, and of the roles and responsibilities of
               various institutional actors, ways and means to reduce responsibility overlaps while promoting
               coordination, collaboration and synergy in an ecosystem approach or landscape / seascape
               perspective, for the consideration and agreement by partners, including other national
               committees and inter-ministerial committees established to support strategies and plans of action
               of relevance to biodiversity;

         (c) Clarify the relationships of the NBSAP including the Biodiversity Targets to other strategies and
               plans and other agreements and propose ways to enhance complementarity and synergy for more
               efficient use of resources and successful implementation; and

         (d) Agree with partners on baselines and common sets of indicators to be used for monitoring and
               assessing progress in implementation of the Biodiversity Targets and NBSAP in general.

The Steering Committee could be organized in, or recommend the establishment of, subcommittees in charge
of guiding, overseeing and sustaining efforts for the achievement of each of the targets.

MOE and a communication and outreach strategy

The MOE and line Ministries have a facilitating and implementing role for the Cambodia Biodiversity
Targets and the NBSAP. As the coordinator of the NBSAP, MOE is expected to develop and implement a
communication and outreach strategy to raise awareness and preparedness about the NBSAP. A good
communication strategy will promote a wide participation and enhance the participation of all groups of
stakeholders, including by recognizing their values, the importance of their contribution and the possible
synergies and win-win situations in which such participation would result.

The communication strategy will target primarily other Ministries involved in the management of
biodiversity components, their departments and administrations, and the interdepartmental and/or inter-
ministerial committees established to achieve some inter-agency coordination of activities at the government
level in the fields of biodiversity and sustainable development including poverty reduction. These
bodies/committees include the National Biodiversity Steering Committee (NBSC), the National Committee
for Forest Management Policy, the National Coastal Zone Steering Committee, the Provincial/ Municipal
Rural Development Committee and the National Committee for the Conflicts Resolution on Protected Areas
Management.

The communication strategy will also aim at bringing on board all the other stakeholder groups, including
local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities, in addition to the civil society, the business and private
sector and knowledge institutions. Participation of local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities
implies that the value of traditional ecological knowledge is recognized, so that this knowledge is integrated
with modern science to promote innovations. A participatory approach is enshrined in the Rectangular
Strategy, other national strategies relating to sustainable development, and in the ecosystem approach, which
is the primary framework for the implementation of the Convention on Biological Diversity.

As a matter of priority, MOE will endeavor to involve all key players so as to ensure the widest ownership
possible of this NBSAP and the Biodiversity Targets, particularly by all relevant authorities, as well as their
active participation in implementing the identified actions. Also, as part of the communication strategy, MOE
will regularly organize meetings relating to NBSAP and the Biodiversity Targets involving other relevant
ministries, government institutions and agencies, local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities, as well
as civil society, the private sector, knowledge institutions and development partners.

                                                               156
                                                                                   National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Ministries and their respective Departments

Each ministry will identify actions already described in its policy and programmes of work, against each
target and under each of the 24 themes and the overall strategic objectives, and inform about plans for
implementation and reporting on progress, and thus how it will contribute to the implementation of the
targets and this NBSAP in general.

Partnerships among the Ministries and among their respective Departments will be established for
leveraging actions and mainstreaming biodiversity across sectors of government, society and the economy,
and to foster synergies for the national implementation of multilateral environmental agreements at the right
scale. Partnerships are essential to support the implementation of Cambodia Biodiversity Targets and the
NBSAP and should be established with the programmes, funds and specialized agencies of the United
Nations system, as well as with other conventions and multilateral and bilateral funding agencies, womens
and youths groups, local communities, indigenous ethnic minorities and non-governmental organizations. In
particular, every effort shall be made to ensure that the achievement of the targets and the implementation of
the NBSAP are always in harmony with the implementation of the other international and regional
agreements already adopted by Cambodia, including the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification (UNCCD), the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), the
Ramsar Convention on Wetlands, the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild
Flora and Fauna (CITES), the World Heritage Convention (WHC), the Man and Biosphere (MAB)
programme and the 1995 Agreement on Cooperation for the Sustainable Development of the Mekong River
Basin.

A common framework and timetable for reporting will be agreed with partners. While sets of indicators
will be agreed upon taking into account the performance indicators listed in Table 29: "Cambodia
Biodiversity Targets 2015-2020 and elements for a plan of action for their implementation", baselines will
have to be defined as well as milestones for each target, building on ongoing initiatives in the relevant
ministries and sectors.

Using the findings from the reporting exercises and actions undertaken to achieve the targets, the NBSAP
will be periodically evaluated, revised and improved, as needed, so that they can respond effectively to
evolving situations in the future.

MOE will provide the clearing-house mechanism for technical and scientific cooperation, knowledge
sharing and information exchange with additional resources to enhance data mobilization and access to data
by, for example as recommended in the 4th Global Biodiversity Outlook, encouraging the use of common
informatics standards and protocols, promoting a culture of data sharing, investing in the digitization of
natural history collections and promoting citizen scientists contributions to the body of biodiversity
observations. National and regional experiences will be regularly compiled in the clearing-house mechanism,
such as the successes and failures on all aspects of biodiversity conservation and sustainable use. These
compilations may lead to the development of guidelines for biodiversity management or the adaptation of
existing ones to the conditions of Cambodia.

As reported in various reports of the Council for the Development of Cambodia (CDC), a coordination
mechanism for government and donors was developed to increase aid effectiveness. This mechanism needs to
be strengthened while ensuring coherence in the actions of all the technical and financial partners.

Provincial and Local Authorities

In order to achieve the targets and implement the NBSAP, many actions will have to be carried out at the
local level. The development of local BSAPs and more specific site relevant targets will be encouraged.
Provincial and Local Authorities will be encouraged and supported in the development and implementation
of local BSAPs and related targets.

                                                               157
                                                                                   National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

5.3 Enabling conditions
Progress towards the achievement of the Cambodia Biodiversity Targets and in general the NBSAP will
greatly depend on the conditions facilitating those actions.
Provisions under the themes
Group 3 themes and a few other themes in this NBSAP consist of strategies and actions that are meant to
enhance and maintain the favorable and enabling conditions for the implementation of the NBSAP and the
achievement of the targets. They are Themes 6 (Land-Use Planning), 15 (Access and Benefit-Sharing), 16
(Customary sustainable use and Traditional Knowledge), 17 (Manufacturing Industry, Biotechnology and
Biosafety, and Tourism), 18 (Resource mobilization including an incentive system that encourages
environmentally responsible behavior), 19 (Community participation), 20 (Awareness, education, research
coordination and development), 21 (Legislation and institutional structure), 22 (Quality of life and poverty
reduction), 23 (Landscape and seascape management and coordination), and 24 (CHM for technical and
scientific cooperation, knowledge sharing and information exchange).
Limited financial resources were found as one of the most critical obstacles to the implementation of the 2002
NBSAP. Resource mobilization is thus essential for operationalizing the updated NBSAP and achieving the
associated targets. A diversified source of financing is recommended, including in particular a strong
engagement of the business sector.

                                                               158
                                                                                   National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

VI. MONITORING, EVALUATION AND REPORTING

Monitoring and evaluation are critical components of the NBSAP and of the Cambodia Biodiversity Targets.
They are useful in reporting on implementation progress, and on the resulting status and trends of biodiversity
and their value. Indicators should be defined and used in the process. Monitoring and evaluation also allow
for an adaptive management capability to be mainstreamed into the strategy and ensure the flexible nature
that characterizes effective and efficient NBSAPs. Periodic assessments and reviews of indicators will serve
to inform about performance and whether strategies or actions need to be modified depending upon the
findings.

The Technical Working Group proposed a list of indicators for the national biodiversity targets (Table 29).
The IBSC can develop a list of additional indicators, including biological, ecological, social and economic
indicators as appropriate, for each action adopted in the NBSAP and for each target, building on the lists of
indicators existing in the country (e.g. in the 2002 NBSAP, the Agricultural Sector Strategic Development
Plan 2006 ­ 2010 and the PRSP document) and, if needed, in the region and at the global level. There are
basically two categories of indicators for monitoring progress in implementing the NBSAP and associated
targets. The first category of indicators includes input, process, and output indicators referred to as
performance indicators. Such indicators are calculated from data that are routinely collected, maintained and
analyzed by the various line ministries and agencies. The second category of indicators includes outcome and
impact indicators.

Bearing in mind that the NBSAP and the national biodiversity targets contain actions to be implemented
under various sectoral departments and agencies, and by a wide range of stakeholders at various sites or in
different landscapes/ecosystems and at different times, in line with the ecosystem or landscape approaches,
monitoring and evaluation will require the broad participation of all stakeholder groups and a strong
coordination mechanism established to enhance efficiency and avoid unnecessary duplications. Stakeholders
typically consist of members of local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities, government institutions
and agencies at the national and subnational levels, civil society, the business/private sector, knowledge
institutions, development partners and partners from regional agreements. In addition to the wide range of
actors who will be implementing the NBSAP, many actions identified in the NBSAP and the associated
biodiversity targets will be undertaken as part of the implementation of national development strategies and
relevant strategies, plans and programmes under line ministries (in particular MAFF, the Ministry of Water
Resources and Meteorology (MOWRM), or the Ministry of Mines and Energy (MME)) other than the MOE,
which is coordinating the NBSAP. The Interministerial Biodiversity Steering Committee (IBSC) and the
National Secretariat for Biodiversity (serving as the IBSC Secretariat) have been established to coordinate the
implementation of the national biodiversity targets and the NBSAP, including monitoring, evaluation and
reporting.

While monitoring should be a continuous process so that it can detect unexpected changes and any
biodiversity change requiring urgent attention, reporting can be done annually and, necessarily, in response to
the obligations already agreed upon by Cambodia, such as national reporting under the MEA or obligations
vis a vis a funding agency. Under the CBD, national reports are due every 4 or 5 years, and the next report is
likely due for 2018. The National Secretariat for Biodiversity should agree with other stakeholders on a
schedule/timetable for collecting information for the national reports, indicators to be used, the
responsibilities of individual organizations, and a data validation mechanism.

The clearing-house mechanism should be a suitable tool for collecting such information, while promoting and
facilitating technical and scientific cooperation. As a prerequisite, the clearing-house mechanism should be
made sufficiently interactive so as to be interoperable with other databases in the country and allow that other
stakeholders can access it, input and manage their own data. Complete transparency in the clearing-house
mechanism can promote a wide participation in the mechanism and strengthen cooperation. Moreover, the
international community and international investors increasingly require transparent and accurate
information.

                                                                159
                                                                                   National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

The monitoring and evaluation process should be agreed upon during the NBSAP development phase or
during the initial phase of implementation. It requires the establishment and strengthening of relevant
institutional and technological capacities, and adequate human and financial resources. The monitoring and
evaluating process should be made coherent through the adoption of guidelines applicable throughout the
implementation of the NBSAP. Monitoring procedures need to be taken into account and be mainstreamed in
the planning process. Biodiversity baselines and targets will be useful in the analysis of the data and
information collected. While Cambodia adopted 20 biodiversity targets, there is a need to agree on baselines
for these.
The National Biodiversity Steering Committee will have to:

         (a) Develop a strategy for obtaining information from the various ministerial departments and
               NGOs, particularly when the data is not part of the routine collections of those ministerial
               departments, or when the data is being collected under other multilateral environmental
               agreements (MEA) or under other strategies and plans that do not correspond exactly to the data
               needed within the NBSAP;

         (b) Develop a strategy for strengthening technical skills among national managerial personnel
               responsible for collecting and processing; and

         (c) Ensure the best coordination between the monitoring processes under the NBSAP and other
               monitoring activities in the country so that there is no unnecessary duplication of effort, but
               rather complementarity, synergy and coordination are built into the process.

                                                               160
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Table 29: Cambodia Biodiversity Targets 2015-2020 and elements for a plan of action for their implementation

Cambodia Biodiversity Target                               Specific actions                                            Indicators of progress towards the
                                                                                                                             achievement of the targets
Target 1 (Aichi Target 174): By 2020, every           1.1. Gather information on the value of biodiversity (at the
Cambodian                                                  genetic, species and ecosystem/landscape levels)           Biodiversity barometer: increase in the
                                                           found in Cambodia;                                         number of people who are conscious about
(i) is conscious about the environmental,                                                                             the environmental, economic, health, social
     economic, health, social and cultural value      1.2. Gather methods for assessing awareness and assess          or cultural value of the services derived
     of the services derived from ecosystems, in           the current level of biodiversity awareness in the         from ecosystems, and people who are
     particular the value of protected area systems        country; and thus identify gaps in knowledge and           integrating or have integrated this
     as well as the value of terrestrial and aquatic       awareness, and those groups (i.e. priority groups for      knowledge in the way they deal with
     animal and plant resources including animal           awareness-raising programmes) whose awareness of           ecosystems and biological resources.
     wildlife, livestock, agricultural, forest,            biodiversity values is most important to the status of
     freshwater and marine resources, and the              biodiversity;                                              Increase in the number of educational and
     biomass used for energy production, and                                                                          media materials and programs that have
                                                      1.3. Gather information on (i) methods of communication,        been provided to educators and learners.
(ii) integrates this knowledge in the way they             awareness-raising and education actions, (ii) messages
     deal with these ecosystems and resources.             regarding biodiversity in Cambodia, and (iii)              Biodiversity CEPA strategy document
                                                           organizations/agencies, involved in communication,         developed.
This target is in line with Theme 20 on                    education and public awareness identify any gaps;
Awareness, Education, Research Coordination                                                                           Nature and number of Biodiversity CEPA
and Development. Raising awareness about              1.4. Gather all partners to identify and prioritize the types   tools developed.
biodiversity and its multiple values is considered         of needed awareness-raising, communication and
as one of the highest priorities for the                   education actions, and design communication,               Number of schools with incorporated
implementation of the NBSAP. Activities                    education and other actions to strengthen awareness of     elements of biodiversity conservation in
considered under this target will contribute to the        biodiversity values and/or fill the gaps as part of a      curricula.
achievement of most, if not all, of the other              communication, education and public awareness
targets. In addition, many actions planned under           strategy;                                                  Number of School Programs on
the other strategic themes (in particular Theme                                                                       biodiversity.
24 on clearing-house mechanism and information        1.5. Carry out the identified actions so as to ensure the
exchange, and the themes in Group 1 on the                 integration of biodiversity knowledge in the way
Protection of Biodiversity and Group 2 on                  people deal with genetic resources, species and
Sustainable use of Biodiversity) will contribute to        ecosystems/land- and sea-scapes while operating in
the implementation of this target in more specific         various sectors (agriculture, mining, forestry etc.); and
sectors or situations.
                                                      1.6. Mainstream the CEPA strategy on biodiversity into
                                                           the curricula of all levels of education.

                                                      161
                                                                                                                    National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Cambodia Biodiversity Target                              Specific actions                                           Indicators of progress towards the
                                                                                                                           achievement of the targets
Target 2 (Aichi Target 2075): By 2020, at the        2.1 Develop, following the guidance in CBD COP
latest, the national budget allocation for                decision X/3 on resource mobilization, a framework        Increase, within the national budget, in the
biodiversity conservation and sustainable use             and guidelines for reporting on biodiversity related      number of items clearly relating to the wide
(including NBSAP implementation) has                      expenditures;                                             range of actions dealing with biodiversity
increased by 20 % through the development                                                                           conservation and sustainable use; and an
and implementation of a resource mobilization        2.2 Estimate past and current budget allocation for            increase in amounts of financial resources
strategy based on identified needs and taking into        biodiversity conservation and sustainable use and the     allocated.
account international and national guidance and           main sources of this financing, taking into account
policies                                                  resources from government, the private sector, and        Biodiversity Trust Fund, including the
                                                          nongovernmental organizations, and including              protected areas fund76 has been established
This target is in line with Theme 18 on Resource          resources from domestic as well as international          in line with the Environment Endowment
Mobilization, Strategic Objective 2. Achievement          sources; and identify NBSAP activities that are           Fund77 and the National Forestry
of Target 1 and all the other targets will depend         currently funded;                                         Development Fund78, and amount of
greatly on financial resources that will be                                                                         resources in the trust fund.
mobilized.                                           2.3 Assess financial needs for additional activities from
                                                          the NBSAPs and their relative priority; and               Increase in total bilateral biodiversity-
                                                                                                                    related ODA commitments by members of
                                                     2.4 Calculate 20% of the amount currently allocated for        the OECD DAC, GEF funding and funds
                                                          biodiversity conservation and sustainable use, and,       from other sources (conventional and
                                                          with the involvement of key stakeholders, develop,        innovative sources) allocated to
                                                          disseminate and implement a strategy to mobilize that     biodiversity.
                                                          amount in addition to the current allocation.
                                                                                                                    Number of assessments of biodiversity
Target 3 (Aichi Target 279):                         3.1 Gather information from all sources on the value80 of      values, in accordance with the Convention.
                                                          biodiversity in the country and thus on the most
By 2020, at the latest, biodiversity values have          important components of biodiversity and their            Extent of integration of values and
been integrated into national and sub-national            ecosystem services, starting with the critical values of  functions of biodiversity into development
development and poverty reduction strategies              "flagship" species and ecosystems. Methods for            plans, and sectoral and development
and planning processes.                                   biodiversity valuation have been published, but the       policies including EIA and SEA, at national
                                                          country will develop national guidelines for              and sub-national levels.
This target is in line with Strategic Objective 1         biodiversity valuation to ensure coherence in the
under Theme 20 on Awareness, Education,                   values allocated to components of biodiversity;           Amounts of resources allocated to the
Research Coordination and Development.                                                                              management of biodiversity in relevant
                                                     3.2 Raise awareness on opportunities and constraints for       sectoral budgets.
Raising awareness about biodiversity and its              integrating biodiversity values into local and national
multiple values is considered as one of the highest       planning, decision-making and reporting processes,
priorities for the implementation of the NBSAP.           based on experiences in Cambodia and in other
Activities considered under this target will              countries;
contribute to the achievement of most of the other
targets.                                             3.3 Identify groups of people to be in charge of

                                                     162
                                                       National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

          Cambodia Biodiversity Target                                      Specific actions                        Indicators of progress towards the
                                                                                                                          achievement of the targets
Target 4 (Aichi Target 682): By 2020,                  integrating into national and sub-national development
freshwater fisheries and aquaculture are               and poverty reduction strategies and planning               From NSDS:
managed sustainably by addressing their                processes. Mobilize them and develop guidelines to               High diversity of fish species.
constraints, and by reducing and preventing            assist them, first, in the inclusion of those values of          Fish populations with sustainable
their possible negative impact on fish stocks          biodiversity that are easiest to account for.                    reproduction.
and on aquatic threatened species and                  Development of national guidelines for the application           Favorable habitats for spawning and
vulnerable ecosystems 83                               of biodiversity-inclusive environmental impact                   feeding.
This target is directly in line with Theme 10 on       assessment (EIA) and strategic environmental                     Good water quality without pollution
Freshwater Fisheries and Aquaculture, Theme 2          assessment (SEA) using the voluntary guideline                   Protection of fish species during spawning
on Threatened Species, Theme 7 on Water                developed under the Convention on Biological                     period.
Resources, Theme 8 on Biodiversity and Climate         Diversity (CBD COP decision VIII/28) would be                    Rules for avoiding over-fishing and
                                                       among the first areas for integrating biodiversity values;

                                                  3.4 Building on the National Green Growth Roadmap81,
                                                       which has been developed for furthering development
                                                       to benefit the people and conserve and restore the
                                                       natural capital base to continue economic growth
                                                       within the limits posed by the ecosystem carrying
                                                       capacity, enhance consideration of biodiversity in key
                                                       economic sector development plans and landscape
                                                       level planning. Coordination among government
                                                       ministries and different levels of government at the
                                                       national and local levels. In addition, time, financial
                                                       resources and both technical and administrative
                                                       capacity will be needed.

                                                  4.1 Gather information on freshwater fisheries and
                                                       aquaculture, their impact on fish stocks and on aquatic
                                                       threatened species and vulnerable ecosystems; on
                                                       management plans already in place; on factors driving
                                                       freshwater fisheries and aquaculture; and on
                                                       stakeholders, including the level and trend of demand
                                                       for fish;

                                                  4.2 Gather representatives of all stakeholder groups to
                                                       design and agree on management plans that could
                                                       include catch reductions, quotas to gear restrictions,
                                                       partial, periodic or full fishery closures, establishment

                                                  163
                                                                                                                National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

          Cambodia Biodiversity Target                                      Specific actions                     Indicators of progress towards the
                                                                                                                       achievement of the targets
Change, and Theme 16 on Customary use and              of conservation areas or recovery plans, and other
Traditional Knowledge. Progress toward the             measures that will rebuild fisheries stocks that have         destructive fishing practices.
achievement of this target will benefit from the       been overexploited or depleted, taking into account
implementation of a number of targets such as          the status and trends of fish stocks, aquaculture,            Strict enforcement of rules
targets 1, 2, 3, 6 to 10, 12, and 16 to 19.            fishing methods used, the law on fisheries, and the
                                                       ecosystem approach, and bearing in mind that a target         Sustainable fishing practices
                                                       in the 2009 NSDS stated that by 2015, the use of
                                                       sustainable fishery practices was to be achieved in           Sustainable aquaculture practice
                                                       70% of the fishing waters of the country.
                                                                                                                Reduction in illegal fishing levels
                                                  4.3 Support decision-making with research in particular
                                                       on fish stock sustainability and harvesting within safe  Numbers and areas of fish sanctuaries:
                                                       ecological limits.                                       Increase in numbers and areas.

                                                  4.4 Establish and support community-based fisheries and       Management effectiveness of fish
                                                       fish sanctuaries/conservation areas; and expand          sanctuaries: improvement in management
                                                       aquaculture.                                             effectiveness.

                                                                                                                Fish stock levels and status of aquatic
                                                                                                                ecosystem: their maintenance or restoration
                                                                                                                to levels that are sustainable.

                                                                                                                Proportion of fish stocks within safe
                                                                                                                biological limits.

                                                                                                                Management plans addressing illegal
                                                                                                                fishing: existence of plans and status of
                                                                                                                their effective implementation. Species
                                                                                                                management and conservation action plans
                                                                                                                produced for freshwater fish, in particular
                                                                                                                endangered species84: existence of plans
                                                                                                                and status of their effective implementation.

                                                                                                                Reduction in number and levels of
                                                                                                                constraints listed under NBSAP theme 10,
                                                                                                                key actions 1.2 and 2.1.

                                                                                                                Implementation of other key actions,
                                                                                                                including relevant legislation relating to the
                                                                                                                impact of fisheries on aquatic biodiversity
                                                                                                                components under theme 10.

                                                                                                                IUCN Red List Index and its trend.

                                                  164
                                                                            National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Cambodia Biodiversity Target                              Specific actions                                           Indicators of progress towards the
                                                                                                                           achievement of the targets
Target 5 (Aichi Target 785): By 2020 the             5.1 Assess the main areas in the country used for
majority of areas under agriculture86, animal             agriculture, including animal production, aquaculture     Area of forests certified by Forest
production, aquaculture87 and forestry88 are              and forestry;                                             Stewardship Council (FSC) and the
managed sustainably, ensuring conservation of                                                                       Program for the Endorsement of Forest
biodiversity, sustainable development, poverty       5.2 Demarcate clear agriculture, aquaculture and forest        Certification (PEFC): increase in coverage
eradication and improved well-being.                      management unit boundaries, and ensure enforcement        of certified forest areas.
                                                          of legal frameworks for the protection of resources in
This target goes with themes 10 on aquaculture,           these areas;                                              Areas under agriculture, animal production
12 on forest resources, and 13 on agriculture and                                                                   and aquaculture where management is
animal production. Relevant actions are              5.3 Identify measures that are in place to ensure              sustainable (including in the type of
                                                          sustainability and describe their effectiveness.          farming.
derived from the programmes of work developed             Encourage successful measures and scale them up as
under the Convention on Biological Diversity and          needed;                                                   Systems/practices, soil management,
actions already adopted by the country under                                                                        harvesting being within ecological limits on
other relevant strategies and actions plans (see     5.4 Undertake research to describe and agree on national       a long term). Harvested products may also
Annex 1 for list of strategies and plans).                sustainability criteria (building on Addis Ababa          be certified.
                                                          Principles and Guidelines for the Sustainable Use of
It is important to note that there may be a link          Biodiversity developed under the Convention on            Percent of forest area certified for sustainable
between forestry, agriculture, aquaculture and            Biological Diversity) for agro-ecosystems and             forestry.
animal production, like in socioecological                aquaculture as there is no universally-agreed
production landscape under the Satoyama                   sustainability criteria except for sustainable forest     Aquaculture production, and production
Initiative.                                               management;                                               over time.

This target is linked to target 4 (regarding         5.5 Carry out research to describe the opportunities and       Number of capacity building workshops
aquaculture), target 8 on protected areas and             constraints to enhancing sustainable management of        and of people informed and/or trained in
conservation areas, particularly protected forests        agriculture, including animal production, aquaculture     sustainable management practices and
                                                          and forestry; bearing in mind that the 2009 NSDS          monitoring.
and a few other targets. Indeed, reducing forest          targeted a minimum of 60% forest cover managed in a
loss and degradation is essential for sustainable         sustainable way, with the participation of the local      Enforcement of laws and measures relating
forest management, which in turn contributes to           community by 2015;                                        to the sustainable use of biological
the reduction and elimination of habitat loss by                                                                    resources.
both deforestation and degradation. In addition,     5.6 Increase education, practical training and awareness-
sustainably managed forests also provide, by              raising activities to promote involvement /engagement     Trend and projections in biodiversity
definition, ecosystem conservation.                       of all, including local communities and indigenous        harvested for food and medicine (in relation
                                                          ethnic minorities, public and private sectors, and civil  to agriculture, forestry, animal production
Restoration of agro-ecosystems and forest                 and religious societies;                                  and aquaculture).
ecosystems including mangroves that have been
under a lot of pressures in recent years (target 6)  5.7 Carry out research on the role of modern                   Demands of products from agriculture,
can be an important step towards the sustainable          biotechnology in agriculture including animal             animal production, aquaculture and
management of these ecosystems. The sustainable           production, aquaculture and forestry;                     forestry, and their yields.

                                                     165
                                                                                                                       National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Cambodia Biodiversity Target                                    Specific actions                                         Indicators of progress towards the
                                                                                                                               achievement of the targets
management of ecosystems sought through this               5.8 Enhance cooperation with CGIAR centers, ITTO,
Target 5 will (i) maintain at an appropriate level              FAO and other organizations working on sustainable      Number of demarcated areas under the
or improve the status of threatened species of                  management in agro-ecosystems, forestry and             responsibility / management of local
fauna and flora, and thus contribute to the                     aquaculture; and                                        communities (assuming that management
achievement of Target 10, (ii) enhance the
resilience of the ecosystems that are being                5.9 Improve enabling environment:
managed sustainably, and may contribute to
carbon stocks and thus to climate change                              Improve water management for agriculture,
mitigation and adaptation and to combating                            forestry, animal production and aquaculture;
desertification (Target 11). In addition, in agro-
ecosystems, enhancing organic carbon contents of                      Improve tenure security and land markets; and
soils can improve land productivity. Soils with
increased carbon stocks have better retention of                      Improve infrastructure for market accessibility
water and, hence, climate resilience. Increased                       and promote marketability of the products.
soil carbon sequestration can make farming a net
carbon sink and hence mitigate GHGs, and (iii)
contribute to the halving of the rate of loss of
natural forests, and the reduction of the
degradation and fragmentation of the ecosystems
under consideration, as well as the
reduction/prevention of pollution, overharvesting,
introduction of invasive alien species and their impacts.

The respect of traditional knowledge, innovations
and practices (Target 18), resource mobilization
(Target 2), reduction of pollutants (Target 16),
control and eradication of invasive alien species
(Target 18), database and information systems
(Target 19), the protection of genetic diversity of
cultivated plants and farmed and domesticated
animals, as well as their in-situ and ex-situ
conservation (Target 20) will all support the
achievement of Target 5.

Target 6 (Aichi Target 1489): By 2020, 10% of              6.1 Identify protected areas and conservation areas
the protected areas, conservation areas, agro-                  (including Ramsar sites and biosphere reserves), agro-
ecosystems and forest ecosystems, including                     ecosystems and forest ecosystems that have been

                                                           166
                                                                            National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Cambodia Biodiversity Target                              Specific actions                                           Indicators of progress towards the
                                                                                                                           achievement of the targets
mangroves, that have been under a lot of                  degraded and require restoration, in order to recover
pressures in recent years are in an advanced              the lost ecosystem services;                              of local communities has more chances of
state of restoration and are providing                                                                              being sustainable and of contributing to the
enhanced services, particularly to women,            6.2 Identify and assess the pressures and underlying           needs of local communities, women, elders,
elders and children of local communities and              factors supporting these pressures;                       children and indigenous peoples. Thus an
indigenous ethnic minority groups.                                                                                  increase could indicate positive steps
                                                     6.3 Identify and demarcate 10% of these areas that can be      toward achieving the target.
This target is relevant to the themes on protected        considered as priorities areas for reasons such as
area system (theme 1), agriculture (theme 13) and         urgency: they can be lost forever or they are having      Red list index for biodiversity in protected
forest resources (theme 12) and its                       the most significantly adverse impact on women,           areas, conservation areas and forest
implementation should be in synergy or at least           elders and children of the local and indigenous           ecosystems.
coordinated with the achievement of targets 1, 2,         communities, or because their restoration can have the
3, 8, 11, 12, 15, 16 and 20. Finally, the                 most significant benefits and yield the most significant  Trend and projections in biodiversity
achievement of Targets 9, 17 and 19 will provide          secondary benefits for the ecosystems and the             harvested for food and medicine (in relation
incentives, knowledge and data / information that         populations depending on them, and for the countrys       to agro-ecosystems, forestry, and animal
can facilitate the implementation of this Target 6.       economy and development;                                  production).

Restoration of forest ecosystems will be made        6.4 Undertake restoration activities and follow up on          Demand for products from agriculture,
having in mind the strategic indicators for NFP           them to ensure their success, while controlling the       animal production, aquaculture and
long-term monitoring, in particular that, by 2029,        pressures that led to the degradation of the ecosystems   forestry, and their yields.
(i) forest cover will have to be increased to 60%         and their constrained provision of ecosystem services,
of the total land area; (ii) Sustainable forest           including through the removal of negative incentives      Indicators can be expressed based on the
management with prescribed silviculture will              and the promotion of positive ones;                       services provided by the ecosystems e.g.
have to be implemented on 2.4 million hectares of                                                                   crop yields in agro-ecosystem, amount of
production forest; (iii) Protected Forest covers     6.5 Put in place mechanisms for monitoring the                 medicinal products harvested sustainably;
should reach 3 million hectares, 500,000 hectares         improvement of ecosystem services and their impact        number of projects focusing on sustainable
of high value commercial plantation should be             particularly on women, elders and children from local     use of biological resources, women, elders,
established and 10 million tree seedlings                 communities and indigenous ethnic minority groups;        children, indigenous peoples and local
distributed per year; and (iv)                                                                                      communities.
                                                     6.6 Strengthen the enabling environment (policy, financial
2 million ha of forest land should be set aside for       resources); and                                           Flow of funds for the restoration of
Community Forestry (CF) groups (approximately                                                                       protected areas, conservation areas, agro-
1,000 CF) fully recognized with CF agreements.       6.7 In order to succeed, it is important that local            ecosystems and forest ecosystems including
                                                          communities, indigenous ethnic minorities, the private    mangroves that have been under a lot of
                                                          sector and other stakeholders are involved as much as     pressures.
                                                          possible in every step; also that awareness is raised
                                                          among populations at all levels of the society            Number of participants have involved in
                                                          regarding the value of ecosystems and their services,     conservation programmes.
                                                          so that there is a transformational change in the way
                                                          people consider biodiversity and ecosystem services

                                                     167
                                                                                National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Cambodia Biodiversity Target                            Specific actions                                          Indicators of progress towards the
                                                                                                                        achievement of the targets
                                                   as national capital/assets.
                                                                                                                 Reports on impact of current production
Target 7 (Aichi Target 490): By 2020, the          Bearing in mind that although Cambodia currently has a        methods and consumption patterns on
Government, the private sector and other                                                                         ecosystems and their services.
stakeholders have taken steps to reduce the        relatively small ecological footprint, its small biocapacity
negative impacts on ecosystems and their                                                                         Data on ecological footprint of industries
services caused by unsustainable production        results in a deficit of about 0.1 global hectares per         operating in Cambodia
and consumption activities.                        person91. Cambodia has adopted strategies and plans
                                                                                                                 A national strategy for sustainable
This target is particularly relevant to Themes 17  (including the National Strategic Development Plan            production and consumption
on Industry and other themes where reference is
made to production and consumption, and the        Update and the Green Growth Roadmap) that are                 Market based incentives (such as taxes and
management of biological resources.                                                                              prices) developed for sustainable
                                                   favorable to the well-being of the people of Cambodia in a    production and consumption92.
Issues and opportunities regarding production
and consumption of biological resources in         sustainable manner. In order to meet Target 7: to develop     Legislations and other programs (green
Cambodia are described under the Theme 4 on                                                                      growth development, Satoyama Initiative)
mining above.                                      an ecologically sustainable system of production and          supporting sustainable development
                                                                                                                 established and implemented.
Achievement of Target 7 will be in synergy and     consumption in all economic sectors (agriculture, food
coordination with the achievement of Target 5                                                                    Number of certified products
(sustainable management of agricultural, animal,   production, garments, energy, mining, fisheries, forestry,    commercialized, in relation to sustainable
aquaculture and forestry productions), Target 6                                                                  production
(regarding the provision of enhanced services      transport, transformation), the country will:
(e.g. food, water, wood and non-timber forest                                                                    Trend in degraded state of ecosystems
products) from protected areas, conservation       7.1 Compile information and undertake research on the         caused by production and consumption
areas, agro-ecosystems and forest ecosystems that       impact of current production methods and                 activities
have been under a lot of pressures in recent            consumption patterns on ecosystems and their
years), Target 10 (on species of fauna and flora        services;                                                Trend in biological diversity as affected by
threatened by unsustainable production and                                                                       production and consumption
consumption), Target 11 (in the sense that         7.2 Assess the ecological footprint of industries operating
sustainable production and consumption e.g.             in Cambodia;                                             Number of enterprises applying sustainable
through the promotion of low carbon technology                                                                   production methods based on developed
will contribute to enhanced carbon stocks),        7.3 Raise awareness of the Government, the private sector     standards;
Target 12 (reduction of habitat degradation,            and other stakeholders regarding the negative impacts
pollution and overharvesting from unsustainable         of unsustainable production and consumption;             New technologies adopted or adapted
production and consumption), Targets 15 and 16
(reduction of pollution and exploitation from      7.4 Formulate and implement a national strategy for
anthropogenic pressures ), Target 17 (on                sustainable production and consumption building on
                                                        best practices, the voluntary 10-Year Framework of
                                                        Programmes on Sustainable Consumption and
                                                        Production Patterns adopted at the Rio+20
                                                        Conference, the Green Growth Roadmap and other
                                                        development strategies adopted earlier by the country.
                                                        The strategy will contain inter alia: standards for
                                                        sustainable production and consumption, and for a
                                                        better quality of life; for the protection of natural
                                                        resources and the promotion of a more efficient use of
                                                        natural resources, products and recovered materials;
                                                        for the promotion of the life cycle approaches,

                                                   168
                                                                           National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Cambodia Biodiversity Target                             Specific actions                                           Indicators of progress towards the
                                                                                                                          achievement of the targets
Traditional knowledge and customary use that             including resource efficiency and sustainable use of
can be used to ensure sustainable production and         resources; as well as science-based and traditional       Report on the conclusion of the rapid
consumption), and Target 19 (on information              knowledge-based approaches, and the 3-R concept           assessments of management effectiveness.
system/clearing-house mechanism for                      (reduce, reuse and recycle) and other related             Strategic Management Plan for PAs and
cooperation and exchange of relevant information         methodologies, as needed.                                 conservation areas.
and technologies). The Protected area system                                                                       Number of updated and new management
(Target 8) and the protection of genetic diversity       The Strategy will call for the engagement of all, in      plans.
(Target 20) will contribute to sustainable               particular the private sector, along the life cycle of
production and consumption of biological                 products in efforts to achieve a shift towards
resources. Target 9 on Payment for ecosystem             sustainable consumption and production, particularly
services can serve as an incentive.                      sectors with a high environmental and social impact.

Target 8 (Aichi Target 1193): In 2020, at the            The national strategy for sustainable production and
latest, existing protected areas and                     consumption will be supported by the promulgation of
conservation areas, including community-                 legislations or regulations on sustainable production
based natural resource management areas,                 and consumption in line with existing laws; a strong
have management plans and have started                   information system at the interface of science and
effective implementation.                                policy that will facilitate the exchange of information
                                                         and cooperation; a programme on communication,
                                                         education, and public awareness building on ongoing
                                                         initiatives, and on scientific and technological
                                                         capacity building for the acquisition and adaptation of
                                                         green technology; and the establishment of financial
                                                         mechanisms to support investments for the recycling
                                                         of wastes, adoption of cleaner production methods
                                                         and, in general, sustainable consumption and
                                                         production patterns;

                                                    7.5 The creation of green jobs and market opportunities
                                                         will serve as incentives for the adoption of sustainable
                                                         production and consumption.

                                                    Regarding the development and implementation of

                                                    management plans for each protected area and each

                                                    conservation area

                                                    8.1 Conduct a rapid/coarse assessment of management
                                                         effectiveness such as the WWF Rapid Assessment and
                                                         Prioritization of Protected Areas Management
                                                         (RAPPAM), so as to identify strategic actions with

                                                    169
                                                                            National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Cambodia Biodiversity Target                              Specific actions                                          Indicators of progress towards the
                                                                                                                          achievement of the targets
By 2020,                                                  regards to protected areas, conservation areas and
                                                          their network for achieving national conservation and    Number of PAME assessments.
 (iv) the coverage of marine and coastal                  development objectives more surely and effectively;
          protected areas and freshwater             8.2 Develop subsequently the strategic management plan        Number of PAs and conservation areas
          protected areas has at least doubled as         called for in the 2008 Protected Area Law, which         where management plans are being
          compared to the 2010 levels;                    should include inter alia:                               implemented.

 (v) Currently unprotected areas of                             A time schedule for conducting (rapid and          Number of rangers in protected areas, their
          particular importance for biodiversity                more comprehensive) assessments of                 number per area, and their Equipment.
          and ecosystem services that are under                 management effectiveness of protected areas
          a lot of pressures from human                         and other conservation areas;                      Plan for doubling marine and coastal PAs
          activities are identified and integrated                                                                 from 2010 level.
          in the protected area system; and                     Plans for identifying an agreed set of standards,
                                                                baselines and best practices for management        Establishment of the MPA that will protect
 (vi) Protected areas and conservation                          methods and methods for ensuring effective and     the coral reefs around Koh Rong and Koh
          areas have been valued, are part of a                 efficient management of protected areas and        Rong Samloem islands and along Preah
          well-connected protected area system                  other conservation areas, taking into account      Sihanouk provinces coast.
          and have been integrated in national                  regional experiences;
          sustainable development goals and                                                                        Plan for the expansion of the protection of
          national green growth strategies, plans               Plans for setting in place a mechanism for         the Tonle Sap-Mekong peat swamp forests.
          and programmes;                                       monitoring and reporting on protected areas,
                                                                conservation areas and the whole national          Studies, plans and implementation of the
By 2029, protected forest covers 3.0 million                    protected areas system;                            plans for establishing protected areas or
hectares, in line with the objectives of the                                                                       conservation areas in Kampong Trach,
National Forest Programme 2010-2029                             A proposed budget or a strategy for mobilizing     Lomphat, Sesan River, Stung / Chi Kreng /
                                                                financial resources for all these activities and   Kampong Svay and Western Siem Pang
This target supports targets 10 and 11 because                  ways and means for the mobilization of funds and   IBAs, and management plans for these
PAs are among measures that can be taken to (i)                 other resources needed.                            protected areas/conservation areas.
address factors affecting threatened fauna and
flora species, and (ii) enhance ecosystem            8.3 Develop management plans for respective PAs and           Studies for ensuring connectivity, as
resilience and the contribution of biodiversity to        conservation areas.                                      needed, among PAs and conservation areas,
carbon stock, and thus contribute to climate                                                                       and establishment of corridors or additional
change mitigation and adaptation and to              For doubling marine and coastal PAs and freshwater            PAs that will establish the needed
combating desertification, respectively.                                                                           connections
                                                     PAs from the 2010 levels:
In addition, PAs are mechanisms that can be used                                                                   Studies on valuation of PAs and
to (i) reduce the rate of loss of natural forests,   8.4 Assess the 2010 coverage of marine and coastal PAs        conservation areas
coral reefs and other natural habitats (Target 12),       and freshwater i.e. the Gulf of Thailand MPA
(ii) halve the anthropogenic pressures on coral           (covering 9,210 ha, as per 2014 WDPA data) and four      Strategies and actions for integrating PAs in
reefs and vulnerable ecosystems impacted by               of the seven national parks, and one of the three        wider landscapes and seascapes and in
climate change (Target 15), and (iii) protect wild        multiple use protected areas, which are coastal and      sustainable development goals, as well as
                                                          marine protected areas. When planning to double this     monitoring, evaluating and adapting
                                                          area, it is useful to consider connecting with the MPA

                                                     170
                                                                            National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Cambodia Biodiversity Target                              Specific actions                                          Indicators of progress towards the
                                                                                                                          achievement of the targets
relatives of genetic resources (Target 20).               planned for the protection of the coral reefs around
                                                                                                                   mechanisms
Marine protected areas would specifically protect        Koh Rong and Koh Rong Samloem islands94 and
coral reefs (Targets 12 and 15) and be used as a                                                                   Plans for expanding protected forest cover
tool for fisheries sustainable management (Target         along Preah Sihanouk provinces coast;                    from the current coverage to 3.0 million
4). Similarly, forest protected areas and                                                                          hectares by 2029, and steps in
conservation areas are tools for sustainable forest  8.5 Regarding freshwater protection, it is necessary to       implementing the plans
management (Target 5).                                    bear in mind that Cambodia adopted the Strategic
                                                          Planning Framework 2010-2019 for Fisheries with the
This target 8 is complemented by target 6 (By             following targets:
2020, 10% of those protected areas [...] that have
been under a lot of pressures in recent years are               At least 35% of the area of inland flooded forest
in an advanced state of restoration and are                     and at least 75% of the area of coastal flooded
providing enhanced services, particularly to local              forest are protected through physical
communities women, elders, children and                         demarcations by the end of 2019.
indigenous peoples ).
                                                                At least 40 of the 97 Upper Mekong deep pools
Achievement of Target 9 on Payment for                          are effectively protected and conserved and at
Ecosystem Services can serve as a source of                     least 80% of the Great Lake fish sanctuaries are
funding for activities under PAs and thus serve as              improved through boundary demarcation,
an incentive.                                                   protection and public awareness by the end of
                                                                2019.

                                                                Post-2019, it will be a goal to complete the
                                                                protection of all flooded forest, deep pools,
                                                                sanctuaries and other critical habitats.

                                                     Regarding integration in the protected area system of

                                                     currently unprotected areas of particular importance for

                                                     biodiversity and ecosystem services that are under a lot of

                                                     pressures.

                                                     8.6 Bearing in mind that all terrestrial ecoregions are
                                                          under protection (20 to 62% coverage of the
                                                          respective ecoregions) except the Tonle Sap-Mekong
                                                          peat swamp forests, of which only 0.6% are protected,
                                                          while a significant portion (> 90%) of this ecoregion
                                                          is under human pressure adversely affecting the
                                                          remaining native vegetation, a study will be carried
                                                          out urgently to demarcate an area of this ecoregion for
                                                          designation as a protected area. A management plan
                                                          containing, among other points, guidelines for the
                                                          participation of local communities and indigenous

                                                     171
                                   National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Cambodia Biodiversity Target                            Specific actions                      Indicators of progress towards the
                                                                                                   achievement of the targets
                                   ethnic minorities, and an assessment of the resources
                                   required to ensure the protection and restoration of
                                   this ecoregion will be developed and used;

                              8.7 In addition, although most Important Bird Areas
                                   (IBA) are covered by protected areas, the following
                                   five sites are in critical situations due essentially to
                                   agricultural expansion and intensification, human
                                   intrusions and disturbances, energy production and
                                   mining, overexploitation of some species, in particular
                                   wood harvesting and collection of non-timber
                                   products: Kampong Trach, Lomphat, Sesan River,
                                   Stung / Chi Kreng / Kampong Svay and Western Siem
                                   Pang. Studies and consultations will be undertaken
                                   urgently to demarcate areas for protection, assess the
                                   resources needed as well as the value and possible
                                   revenues from these protected areas. Plans will be
                                   developed for the effective management of these
                                   areas, including guidelines for the participation of
                                   local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities as
                                   well as plans for strengthening institutions and human
                                   capacities;

                              8.8 Both these IBAs and the Tonle Sap-Mekong peat
                                   swamp forests ecoregions include wetlands/freshwater
                                   that will also be protected (as part of the first part of
                                   sub-paragraph (i) of this target).

                                   It should be noted that, in order to ensure connectivity
                                   among protected areas and conservation areas,
                                   corridors may be considered for addition to the
                                   protected area system. A study will be conducted to
                                   assess the needs for establishing corridors among
                                   protected areas and conservation areas.

                              Regarding valuation of PAs and conservation areas.

                              8.9 Carry out an assessment of the full range of ecosystem
                                   services provided by PAs that are critical to the
                                   economy and social well-being of the population. This

                              172
                                   National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Cambodia Biodiversity Target                            Specific actions                     Indicators of progress towards the
                                                                                                  achievement of the targets
                                   assessment will also estimate the costs associated with
                                   the loss of these services, and the costs of managing
                                   the PAs.

                              Regarding integration in national sustainable
                              development goals and national green growth strategies,
                              plans and programmes.

                              8.10Compile information on the integration of PAs in
                                   national sustainable development goals from relevant
                                   initiatives such as the landscape integration project,

                                  called "CALM"95. Building on those experiences:

                                         create a group of partners and decide on a core
                                         group; and set the goals to achieve by integrating
                                         PAs in sustainable development goals, as well as
                                         parameters;

                                         assess the broader context consisting of a review
                                         of the protection context (existing PAs and their
                                         effectiveness, additional PAs needed), the
                                         ecological context (ecosystems/habitats and their
                                         value; key biodiversity and connectivity gaps in
                                         ecosystems and PAs), the socio-economic, policy
                                         and sectoral opportunities and constraints;

                                         develop and implement strategies and actions
                                         taking into account the gaps and opportunities

                                         establish monitoring, evaluating and adapting
                                         mechanisms

                              8.11Also see actions under Target 3 for additional actions.

                              Regarding achievement of the objective of the National
                              Forest Programme 2010-2029 to have 3.0 million
                              hectares of protected forest cover by 2029, and bearing in
                              mind that currently, the surface area of protected forests
                              is about 1.63 million ha,

                              8.12 A study will be carried out to identify forest areas of
                                    significant ecological, biological and socioeconomic
                                    importance requiring protection or restoration. These

                              173
                                                                                                                National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

          Cambodia Biodiversity Target                                       Specific actions                    Indicators of progress towards the
                                                                                                                       achievement of the targets
Target 9 (Aichi Target 396): By 2020, Payment            areas will be mapped out taking into account land
for Ecosystem Services (PES) is used                     tenure and access rights issues, demarcated and        Number of biodiversity friendly incentives
throughout the country as an incentive for the           submitted for designation. As noted in the NFP,        and PES programs or projects developed
conservation and sustainable use of                      given the diversity of the legal status ascribed to    and implemented.
biodiversity.                                            different land units in Cambodia such as forest        Number of legislations regarding Payment
This target is relating to Theme 18 on Resource          reserves, wildlife reserves, protection forests and    for Ecosystem Service (PES) developed
mobilization. Its implementation will benefit all        national parks, efforts should be made to ensure       and implemented.
the other targets dealing directly or indirectly         coherence and synergy with respect to conservation     Status of key ecosystem services and their
with ecosystems and biological resources as an           value.                                                 benefits in areas targeted by PES.
incentive for conservation and sustainable use
                                                   9.1 Raise awareness about PES schemes, opportunities,        National Red List of threatened species.
Target 10 (Aichi Target 1297): By 2020, all             requirements, risks and constraints, and                This list could be updated every two years
species of fauna and flora threatened at                build/strengthen capacity for valuation of ecosystem    and automatically aligned with wildlife
national level have been identified and their           services;                                               legislation.
status has been improved significantly as a
                                                   9.2 Identify ecosystem service prospects including their
                                                        marketable value, and potential buyers / beneficiaries
                                                        in the country and region;

                                                   9.3 Assess and build/strengthen institutional (including
                                                        legal, policy, land ownership context and existing
                                                        rules for PES markets and deals) and technical
                                                        capacity;

                                                   9.4 Review options for payment and contract types, and
                                                        develop PES agreements;

                                                   9.5 Implement PES agreements, and set in place
                                                        mechanisms for monitoring, as well as ensuring
                                                        compliance and enforcement, and for evaluating the
                                                        deal/agreement; and

                                                   9.6 Compile experiences/case studies in the national
                                                        clearing­house mechanism for awareness-raising and
                                                        education programmes.

                                                   10.1 Compile a list of threatened species of fauna and
                                                         flora, assess their status and trends, and describe
                                                         their ecological and socioeconomic importance;

                                                   10.2 Identify and describe their direct and underlying

                                                   174
                                                                                                                   National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Cambodia Biodiversity Target                                Specific actions                                         Indicators of progress towards the
                                                                                                                          achievement of the targets
result of applying measures to address their                 threats;
respective threats.                                    10.3 In a participatory way and taking into account the     Other lists of threatened species include
                                                                                                                   CITES appendices.
This target is relevant to Theme 2 on endangered             knowledge, know-how and practices of local
species. Also, actions required for the                      communities and indigenous ethnic minorities, put     Description of the ecological and
conservation of threatened species of fauna and              forward and implement measures to address the         socioeconomic importance of threatened
flora under this Target 10 will likely include               direct and underlying threats. Some of the direct     species, and possibly the consequences of
designation and effective management of                      threats were considered under other strategic themes  their loss, for awareness-raising
protected areas and conservation areas (Theme 1              in this NBSAP, such as mining (Theme 4), climate      programmes.
and target 8). Ex-situ conservation (Theme 3) can            change (Theme 8), overharvesting and ecosystem
complement these actions. Mining (Theme 4),                  degradation (Themes 9 to 14), pollution (e.g.,        Awareness-raising programmes integrating
unsustainable tourism (Theme 17), forest                     Themes 17 and 22), invasive alien species (Themes     sections on threatened species.
conversion to agricultural lands (Themes 12 and              12 and 13), and manufacturing industries,
13), pollution and wastes from manufacturing                 biotechnology / biosafety and tourism (Theme 17),     Number of habitat restoration programmes
industries (Theme 17), unsustainable energy                  while the themes in Group 3 dealt in general with     and species recovery action plans: the goal
production (Theme 14) and climate change                     underlying threats. Both ex-situ and in-situ          of these programmes and action plans is to
(Theme 8) can be cited among the direct threats              conservation or establishment and effective           enable the best management and
posed to species of flora and fauna.                         management of PAs are among actions required to       conservation of threatened species.
                                                             conserve and improve the status of threatened
In addition, actions necessary to meet this Target           species;                                              Size and distribution of habitats for
10 will also deliver substantial contributions to      10.4 Raise awareness about threatened species; and          threatened species identified.
other Cambodia Biodiversity Targets. For               10.5 Monitor and assess effectiveness of measures taken
example, (i) an effectively managed protected                                                                      Species Action Plans produced for all Asian
area system will contribute to the reduction in the                                                                Species Action Plan (ASAP) Critically
rate of loss of natural habitats (Target 8); (ii)                                                                  Endangered Vertebrates.
aquaculture can relieve the stress of fishing on
fish stocks and well managed fisheries,                                                                            All ASAP species protected within
agriculture, animal production and forestry                                                                        Cambodian protected area network
(Targets 4 and 5) will ensure that these sectors have
no significant adverse impacts on threatened species.                                                              Number and size of habitats hosting
                                                                                                                   endangered species.
Similarly, actions taken to achieve other targets
(e.g., Target 1 on raising awareness about the                                                                     Number of illegal activities on the
value of components of biodiversity, Targets 6                                                                     threatened species: decline in the number
and 11 putting forward ecosystem restoration,                                                                      and size indicates progress toward
Target 7 for the sustainable production and                                                                        achievement of the target.
consumption of biological resources and
ecosystem services, Target 15 to reduce                                                                            Occurrence of threats: reduction in the
anthropogenic pressures on biodiversity                                                                            occurrence and impact of threats/pressures
                                                                                                                   is a sign of progress towards the recovery
                                                                                                                   of threatened fauna and flora species.

                                                       175
                                                                                                         National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Cambodia Biodiversity Target                              Specific actions                                          Indicators of progress towards the
                                                                                                                          achievement of the targets
components impacted by climate change, Target
                                                                                                                   Number and extent (area) of restoration and
16 for the reduction of pollutant pressures on                                                                     rehabilitation programmes
                                                                                                                   Legislations on forestry and other natural
ecosystems, and Target 18 for controlling                                                                          resources, revised as needed to ensure
                                                                                                                   adequate integration of biodiversity and its
invasive alien species) will support actions                                                                       associated ecosystem services, and their
towards the achievement of this Target 10..                                                                        enforcement.
                                                                                                                   REDD+ projects
Target 11 (Aichi Target 1598): By 2020,              11.1 Identify and assess the status and trends of degraded    Number of ecosystems represented within
ecosystem resilience and the contribution of              forests including mangroves, degraded PAs, degraded      Cambodian protected area system / network
biodiversity to carbon stocks have been                   conservation areas and other degraded ecosystems         of well managed protected areas with
enhanced, through the conservation and                    such as agro-ecosystems and wetlands;                    zonation, management plans, and adequate
restoration of degraded ecosystems, focusing in                                                                    staff
particular on degraded forests, protected areas      11.2 Identify and assess the direct and underlying causes of  Level of species, genetic and habitat
and conservation areas, thereby contributing              ecosystem degradation;                                   diversity: the higher the level, the higher
to climate change mitigation and adaptation                                                                        the chances of having resilience
and to combating desertification.                    11.3 Enhance awareness about climate change mitigation
                                                          and adaptation measures in the country;                  Number of persons/Institutions carrying out
This target is in                                                                                                  inventories and biodiversity assessment of
                                                     11.4 Undertake studies on ecosystems resilience and
This target is applicable to all degraded                 restoration in Cambodia and in the region;
ecosystems but it is particularly relevant to
Theme 1 on protected area system, Theme 8 on         11.5 Apply best practices to identified degraded
biodiversity and climate change, Theme 9 on               ecosystems for their restoration and resilience, and
forests, Theme 13 on agricultural lands, and              assess their contribution to carbon stocks, taking into
Theme 4 on mining. Actions envisaged under                account ongoing initiatives implementing, among
many other themes will support actions for this           other national strategies and plans, the 2006 National
target; for example, under Theme 6 and Group 3            Adaptation Programme of Action on Climate Change,
themes.                                                   and the Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan
                                                          2014-2023, and in synergy with ongoing initiatives in
As such, this target will reinforce progress toward       the context of the Clean Development Mechanism
the achievement of Target 5 (Sustainable                  (CDM), REDD+ and other carbon financing
management of forests and agricultural lands),            mechanisms for climate change mitigation and
Target 6 (for 10 % ecosystem restoration), Target         adaptation;
8 (on PA system), Target 15 (on controlling
anthropogenic pressures) and will benefit from       11.6 Legislation and incentives; and
actions undertaken for Targets 19 (on clearing ­
house mechanism), 17 (traditional knowledge).        11.7 Strengthen human, institutional, technological and
                                                          financial capacities building.

                                                     Actions identified for Target 8 are also relevant here.

Target 12 (Aichi Target 599): By 2020, the rate 12.1 Conduct biodiversity assessments/inventories of
of loss of natural forests100, coral reefs and       natural habitats, with emphasis on natural forests

                                                     176
                                                                           National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Cambodia Biodiversity Target                             Specific actions                                           Indicators of progress towards the
                                                                                                                          achievement of the targets
other natural habitats is at least halved; and           including mangroves, coral reefs, wetlands, areas
habitat degradation and fragmentation,                   around river banks, lake shores, and un-protected         natural habitats
pollution, overharvesting, introduction of               biodiversity hotspots;
invasive alien species and their impacts are                                                                       Number of natural habitats under protection
significantly reduced.                              12.2 Compile information on their status and trends from       with functional management plans
                                                         diverse sources including scientists, local
This target is applicable to all natural habitats        communities, indigenous ethnic minorities and             Plans of habitat loss prevention, and for
with some focus on natural forests and coral             citizens at large, bearing in mind that information on    habitat restoration.
reefs, and also applicable to all direct causes of       forests has been submitted regularly in the context of
biodiversity loss. As such, implementation of            the FAO Forest Resource Assessment;                       Size of habitat restored and/or protected.
actions under all the other themes will support
the achievement of this target. In addition,        12.3 Conduct studies to assess the rate of loss of these       Number and capacity of rangers and
achieving this target has potential synergies and        natural habitats / ecosystems and calculate the end       operational equipment and facilities for
co-benefits associated with many other Targets,          point to half the rate of loss;                           preventing habitat losses.
especially with respect to Targets 5, 6 (ecosystem
restoration), 7 (sustainable production and         12.4 Identify the direct and indirect causes of loss of these  Coverage/Extent of natural habitats.
consumption), 8 (protected area system), 11              natural habitats / ecosystems. Among these, document
(ecosystem resilience), 15 (reducing                     and assess in particular the impact of the following      (Annual) rate of loss of natural habitats.
anthropogenic pressures) and 18 (control of              drivers: habitat degradation and fragmentation,
invasive alien species).                                 pollution, overharvesting, introduction of invasive
                                                         alien species. Other drivers of biodiversity loss should
                                                         be kept in mind, including coastal development,
                                                         agricultural conversion, water diversions,
                                                         channelization, construction of dams and roads, and
                                                         climate induced sea level rise;

                                                    12.5 Describe and assess the effectiveness of measures
                                                         taken to address the causes of habitat / ecosystem
                                                         loss, in particular habitat degradation and
                                                         fragmentation, pollution, overharvesting, introduction
                                                         of invasive alien species, and document best practices.

                                                         Measures to be considered will include actions to be
                                                         taken under other targets such as Targets 1 and 3
                                                         (valuation of biodiversity, awareness of the values and
                                                         integration in development plans), Target 5
                                                         (sustainable aquaculture to reduce the stress on
                                                         fisheries, and sustainable forest management), Target
                                                         7 (sustainable production and consumption and
                                                         emphasis on efficiency and the 3-R concept), Target 8

                                                    177
                                   National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Cambodia Biodiversity Target                            Specific actions                     Indicators of progress towards the
                                                                                                  achievement of the targets
                                   (Protected area system) including designation of
                                   heritage sites under UNESCO or wetlands under the
                                   Ramsar Convention, Target 10 (protection of
                                   threatened species), Target 15 (reducing
                                   anthropogenic pressures on natural habitats impacted
                                   by climate change), and Target 18 (control of invasive
                                   alien species). These measures can be prioritized
                                   using such criteria as (i) measures with immediate
                                   impacts on the ground in addressing the drivers of
                                   change, (ii) starting with actions having zero or
                                   negative costs; then actions having a relatively low
                                   cost but high impact; and finally actions that are
                                   expensive to carry out especially if their impact is
                                   limited; and (iii) actions that can simultaneously help
                                   achieve other Targets;

                              12.6 Develop plans to control the causes of loss, in
                                   particular habitat degradation and fragmentation,
                                   pollution, overharvesting, introduction of invasive
                                   alien species, including through the strengthening of
                                   some of the measures taken and application of new
                                   ones;

                              12.7 Build and strengthen the capacities, including human,
                                   institutional, technological and financial capacities,
                                   needed for the implementation of the plans.

                                         Develop and implement communication plans
                                         and integrate consideration of natural
                                         habitats/ecosystem issues in education and
                                         awareness-raising programmes;

                                         Enhance the enabling conditions including by
                                         strengthening participation, cooperation and
                                         coordination (within the country, at the regional
                                         and international level) and other actions
                                         described under the NBSAP themes in Group 3;

                                         Law enforcement is of fundamental importance
                                         to stop illegal activities such as illegal logging

                              178
                                                                           National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Cambodia Biodiversity Target                             Specific actions                                            Indicators of progress towards the
                                                                                                                           achievement of the targets
Target 13 (Aichi Target 16101): By 2015,                       and fishing methods;
Cambodia has designated a national focal                       Apply biodiversity-inclusive environmental           Relevant Laws and policy frameworks on
point and one or more competent national                       impact assessments on all projects, and design       ABS have been established.
authorities for the Nagoya Protocol on Access                  and implement mitigation measures; and               Education and capacity building programs
to Genetic Resources and the Fair and                          Participation in REDD+ and application of            on the Nagoya Protocol on ABS have been
Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from                     payment for ecosystem services and product           organized and implemented.
their Utilization (ABS), and established a                     certification can support the actions identified in  Case study on Access to Genetic Resources
functional ABS Clearing-House as part of the                   the plans.                                           and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of
clearing-house mechanism;                           12.8 Implement the plans; and                                   Benefits Arising from their Utilization
                                                    12.9 Monitor and evaluate progress and adapt the plans as       (ABS).
By 2020, Cambodia has developed and is              needed for improved effectiveness.
enforcing a legislation and national policies on    13.1See actions under Strategic Objective 2 of Theme 15,        National Biodiversity Strategy and Action
access to genetic resources and the fair and             with the support from actions under the other strategic    Plan have been updated on time and
equitable sharing of benefits arising from their         objectives as part of the enabling conditions.             published.
utilization.                                                                                                        Number of national, sub-national and
                                                    14.1 Update National Biodiversity Status Report (NBSR-          sectoral plans in which biodiversity
Actions under Theme 15 on Access and Benefit-             2001) to use as input for updating NBSAP.
Sharing are relevant for achieving this target
                                                    14.2 Update National Biodiversity Strategy and Action
Target 14 (Aichi Target 17102):                           Plan (NBSAP-2002) to align with Global Strategy
                                                          for Biodiversity 2010-2020 and national
By 2015, the National Biodiversity Strategy               circumstances.
and Action Plan (NBSAP) have been updated
and adopted, and have commenced to be
implemented effectively.

This is an overall target for the updated strategy

                                                    179
                                                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

          Cambodia Biodiversity Target                  Specific actions                                      Indicators of progress towards the
and have achieved in 2016                                                                                           achievement of the targets

Target 15 (Aichi Target 10103): By 2020,           15.1 Inventory annually and describe ecosystems that are  conservation has been integrated.
anthropogenic pressures (pollution,                     vulnerable to climate change in Cambodia, including
exploitation, sedimentation...) on coral reefs          in particular coral reefs, and describe factors      The level of participation of all the
and vulnerable ecosystems impacted by                   determining vulnerability;                           Ministries highlighted.
climate change have been significantly
reduced.                                           15.2 Identify and assess the impact of anthropogenic      Actions taken to demonstrate outcomes of
                                                        pressures on these vulnerable ecosystems;            implementation of NBSAP.
This target goes essentially with strategic
objective 1 under Theme 11 on marine and           15.3 Develop plans to reduce these pressures and restore  Location, status and trends of coral reef and
coastal resources and actions under Themes              the degraded ecosystem and enhance management to     other ecosystems vulnerable to climate
7(Water resources), 8 (Biodiversity and climate         build up ecosystem resilience. Generic measures are  change have been determined and updated
change), 9 (Forest resources), 11 (Coastal and          identified essentially under Targets 8, 11 and 12    annually.
marine resources) and 13 (Agriculture and               above, but also under many other Targets;
animal production). There are also a lot of co-                                                              Number of studies on anthropogenic
benefits in achieving this target with other       15.4 Implement plans; and                                 pressures (including in particular pollution
targets, in particular for the sustainable                                                                   and sedimentation affecting coral reefs)and
management of fisheries and aquaculture (Target    15.5 Monitor impact of measures taken, evaluate progress  their impact on vulnerable ecosystems.
4), the sustainable management of areas under           and adapt the plans as needed for improved
agriculture, aquaculture and forestry (Target 5),       effectiveness.                                       Plans to address the pressures on vulnerable
sustainable production and consumption (Target                                                               ecosystems.
7), an effectively managed protected area system
(Target 8), the reduction of the loss of natural                                                             Project submitted or funded to address the
habitats (Target 12) and the reduction of                                                                    pressures on vulnerable ecosystems and to
pollutant pressures on ecosystems (Target 16).                                                               restore degraded ecosystems and enhance
                                                                                                             management to build up ecosystem
                                                                                                             resilience.

                                                                                                             Number of ongoing and/or planned
                                                                                                             programmes for reducing anthropogenic
                                                                                                             activities on coral reef and other vulnerable
                                                                                                             ecosystems.

                                                                                                             Extent of healthy and/or recovering coral
                                                                                                             reefs and other vulnerable ecosystems.

                                                                                                             Number and extent of protected
                                                                                                             areas/conservation areas covering coral
                                                                                                             reefs and other vulnerable ecosystems
                                                                                                             impacted by climate change.

                                                                                                             Laws on management, exploitation,
                                                                                                             pollution of ecosystems, existing, being
                                                                                                             reviewed or updated, and status of their

                                                   180
                                                                          National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Cambodia Biodiversity Target                            Specific actions                                             Indicators of progress towards the
                                                                                                                           achievement of the targets
Target 16 (Aichi Target 8104): By 2020,            Bearing in mind that Cambodia is undergoing rapid
pollutant pressures on terrestrial and aquatic                                                                      enforcement.
ecosystems are substantially reduced to levels     development and industrial growth, that, as a result, air
that are not detrimental to ecosystem function     quality is deteriorating from industrial and handicraft          Number of people, in particular fishers and
and biodiversity.                                                                                                   representatives of the private sector,
                                                   processes as well as fossil fuel combustion, that soils and      government staff who have received
Actions under Themes 4 on mining, 5 on                                                                              education, training or who have participated
Environmental Security, 7 on water resources, 11   waters are polluted by chemicals used in agriculture and         in awareness-raising workshops on coral
on marine and coastal resources, 17 on industry                                                                     reef and environmental protection law.
and, and 8 on climate change will support the      mining and various types of wastes, and that marine and
achievement of this target. There are potential                                                                     Assessment reports on public awareness on
synergies in implementing this Target activities   coastal areas are being degraded from land-based                 coral reef protection.
and the activities planned under Targets 5 for
sustainable management of areas under              activities as well as from ships, Cambodia can carry out         Map of polluted areas and studies
agriculture, forestry and aquaculture, 6 on        the following activities to meet its target of significantly     documenting the nature, sources levels, as
sustainable fisheries and aquaculture, 9 (because                                                                   well as the environmental/ecological and
payment for ecosystem services will discourage     reducing pollutant pressures on terrestrial and aquatic          socioeconomic impacts of the pollutants.
anthropogenic pressures on ecosystems), 15 for
the reduction of anthropogenic pressures on        ecosystems:                                                      Studies compiling the measures taken to
vulnerable ecosystems impacted by climate                                                                           address the current and possible future.
change, and 18 for the control and eradication of  16.1 Map out areas in terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems         pollution, including promulgated laws and
invasive alien species.                                  that are polluted, document the nature and sources of      subdecrees, and their effectiveness.
                                                         the pollutants, and assess the levels, impacts and costs;
                                                                                                                    Plans to address current and possible future
                                                   16.2 Identify measures taken, including promulgated laws         pollutions.
                                                         and subdecrees to address the current pollution,
                                                         assess their effectiveness and identify gaps;              Implementation of international treaties and
                                                                                                                    plans having provisions to control
                                                   16.3 Formulate and implement plans for integrated                pollution.
                                                         management to address current and possible future
                                                         pollution, taking into account experiences in the          Water quality standards such as Total
                                                         country and region, and best practices, drawing also       Suspended Solids (physical), Oxygen levels
                                                         from treaties ratified by Cambodia and international       (chemical) are adopted and implemented.
                                                         plans such as the International Convention for the
                                                         Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL) and            Adoption of green management strategies
                                                         the Global Programme of Action for the Protection          and approaches in organizations/industries
                                                                                                                    that are sources of pollutants.

                                                                                                                    Educational programs on water pollutants.

                                                                                                                    Proportion of agricultural areas with high
                                                                                                                    use of pesticides and chemical fertilizers.

                                                                                                                    Proportion of water areas seriously

                                                   181
                                                                                                                National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Cambodia Biodiversity Target                           Specific actions                                          Indicators of progress towards the
                                                                                                                       achievement of the targets
                                                        of the Marine Environment from Land-based
                                                        Activities. It should be noted that actions identified  polluted.
                                                        for the achievement of other targets, such as actions
                                                        for sustainable production and consumption are          Proportion of fish stocks contaminated by
                                                        applicable here; for example, industrial pollution can  Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) and
                                                        be controlled by using cleaner production. Organic      heavy metals.
                                                        agriculture can solve to some extent the question of
                                                        excessive chemical input in modern agriculture.         Proportion of untreated wastewater
                                                        Recycling can reduce the amount of industrial or        disposed into the coast and ocean area
                                                        domestic wastes. Perverse subsidies leading to
                                                        excess nutrient use in agricultural lands can be        Proportion of industries including mining
                                                        removed;                                                with environmental policy adopted and used.

                                                  16.4 Prioritize interventions on the basis of their impact,   Amount of wastes an hazardous wastes
                                                        feasibility and cost;                                   generated.

                                                  16.5 Put in place mechanisms for monitoring pollution         Area of land contaminated by hazardous
                                                        against agreed guidelines and adopted national          waste (hectare)
                                                        standards, and the effectiveness of measures taken;
                                                                                                                Assessment reports on changing behavior
                                                  16.6 Develop and carry out communication, education           of people in usage, storage and
                                                        and awareness-raising programmes;                       management of solid waste and waste
                                                                                                                water.
                                                  16.7 Strengthen human and technological capacity, and
                                                        institutional structures, including in particular the   Pollution monitoring reports (including
                                                        facilities105 under MOE established to control          nitrogen deposition, wastes etc.) and EIA
                                                        pollution; and                                          practices.

                                                  16.8 Mobilize the necessary funds from diverse sources.       Strengthening of MOE Department in
                                                                                                                charge of pollution control.
Target 17 (Aichi Target 18106): By 2020, the      Building on the guidance provided in various CBD COP
traditional knowledge, innovations and                                                                          Rights, traditional knowledge and
practices of indigenous ethnic minorities and     decisions on Article 8(j) and related provisions, and also    customary usage of biodiversity have been
local communities relevant for the                                                                              written in national policy on Indigenous
conservation and sustainable use of               building on actions being carried out under various           Ethnic Minorities and local communities
biodiversity, and their customary use of                                                                        Development.
biological resources, are                         strategic themes, in particular theme 16 and 19,
                                                                                                                Laws relating to the respect of traditional
(a) respected, subject to national legislation    17.1 Develop and strengthen national level strategies,        knowledge, innovations and practices of
     and relevant international obligations, and        including sui generis systems, for promoting and        indigenous ethnic minorities and local
                                                        protecting traditional knowledge and the customary      communities are being enforced both at
(b) fully integrated and reflected in the               sustainable use of biological diversity, taking into    national and sub-national levels.
                                                        account the standards adopted by the CBD COP
                                                        including the Akwé: Kon Guidelines for

                                                  182
                                                                                                                          National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Cambodia Biodiversity Target                                      Specific actions                                         Indicators of progress towards the
                                                                                                                                 achievement of the targets
     implementation of the Convention and the                      Environmental Assessment, the Code of Ethical
     NBSAP with the full and effective                             Conduct;                                               Number of local communities and
     participation of these communities, at all              17.2 Strengthen capacity building initiatives to foster      indigenous ethnic minorities involved in
     relevant levels.                                              effective participation of indigenous ethnic           planning processes.
                                                                   minorities and local communities in the                Number of certified traditional products.
This target is linked to Theme 16 on Customary                     implementation of the CBD, in particular Articles      Children from local communities and
use and Traditional knowledge and Theme 19 on                      8(j), 10(c) and related provisions, and the NBSAP      indigenous ethnic minorities have been
Community Participation and other related                          whenever relevant traditional knowledge, innovation    provided with at least primary and
themes such as Theme 20 on awareness-raising.                      and practices are required; and                        secondary education.
This Target is relevant to the overall Strategic             17.3 Strengthen capacities for the implementation of         Local communities and indigenous ethnic
Objective A and Cambodia Target 1 because                          Articles 8(j), 10(c) and related provisions under the  minorities have opportunities to receive
assessment of the status and trends of biodiversity                CBD, including for co-managing protected areas and     relevant professional training according to
and its value usually includes assessment of the                   conservation areas.                                    their needs and locations.
associated traditional knowledge.                                                                                         Culture of local communities and
                                                             Bearing in mind that: As stated in the 5th National Report   indigenous ethnic minorities is better
This Target is also cross-cutting under a number             under the CBD, there are undocumented cases of               protected and conserved.
of other themes107 and as an essential element of            detrimental effects of invasive alien species (IAS) in       The different indigenous cultural groups
the "enabling" cluster, required for the                     Cambodia; However, a number of known aggressive              have been or are being identified.
achievement of other Cambodia Biodiversity                   invaders have been reported, and According to IUCN109 ,      Local communities and indigenous ethnic
Targets. Indigenous and local communities have                                                                            minorities have been provided legal rights
been acknowledged as key partners in achieving                   many IAS have been introduced into the Lower             to own and use their lands.
the goals of the CBD and other biodiversity-                     Mekong Basin (LMB) region for economic and
related conventions, and their knowledge,                        aesthetic reasons, and several others have entered       Number of studies and programmes to
innovations and practices are essential for the                                                                           monitor potentially invasive alien species
sustainable management of biodiversity.                                                                                   present in Cambodia
                                                                                                                          Number of invasive aliens species
Given the broad nature of this target, progress                                                                           identified.
towards its fulfillment will contribute to several                                                                        Number of invasive aliens species for
other targets, in particular targets 4, 5, 6, 8, 13 and 15.                                                               which pathways have been described as
                                                                                                                          well as factors facilitating their
Target 18 (Aichi Target 9108): By 2020, major
invasive alien species (IAS) and their pathways
have been identified and prioritized, and the
prioritized IAS and pathways are controlled.

This target is a cross-cutting issue particularly
relevant to Themes 1, 2, 9 to 13. It is important to
note that ecosystem degradation and climate
change impacts are particularly favorable to the

                                                             183
                                                                          National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Cambodia Biodiversity Target                            Specific actions                                           Indicators of progress towards the
                                                                                                                         achievement of the targets
establishment and spread of invasive alien             accidentally;
species.                                                                                                          establishment and spread
                                                       at present, the major pathways for introduction of IAS
Implementation of Target 18 can be in synergy          in the region include aquaculture development,             Laws and policy frameworks developed for
particularly with implementation of activities         horticulture, aquariums and ornamental fish trades,        the prevention and control of IAS and their
under Targets 1 (awareness-raising about causes        bearing in mind that other pathways include                enforcement.
of biodiversity loss), 4 (sustainable management       mariculture, agriculture, forest plantation, transport
of fisheries and aquaculture), 5 (sustainable          systems (e.g. ship ballast water, fouling on the hulls of  Areas affected by invasive aliens species
management of areas under agriculture, forestry        ships and other boats, transport of raw goods such as      identified.
and aquaculture), 6 (ecosystem restoration), 8         timber), and tourists;
(protected area system), 10 (protection of                                                                        Trends in habitat conversion caused by
threatened species), 11(ecosystem restoration and      the spread of IAS in the region has been aggravated by     IAS.
resilience), 12 (reducing the rate of loss of          development activities such as construction of dams,
natural habitats), and 15 (reducing                    water stream diversions, urbanization, agricultural        Number of invasive aliens species control
anthropogenic pressures including IAS on               expansion,                                                 programs under management programs.
vulnerable ecosystems impacted by climate
change)                                            Cambodia will undertake the following actions to achieve       Protection and eradication measures on the
                                                   the target by preventing the introduction, spread and          IAS.
                                                   establishment of IAS:
                                                                                                                  Support given to strengthen quarantine
                                                   18.1 Monitor the behavior of potential IAS and set a           services in the country.
                                                         mechanism in place for this monitoring;
                                                                                                                  Mechanisms in place to boost regional
                                                   18.2 Monitor the known pathways for introduction of            cooperation and coordination.
                                                         possible IAS in the LMB region (in particular trade
                                                         of species introduced for aquaculture, horticulture      Popular publications of laws, regulations
                                                         and as pets);                                            addressing IAS issues, and their
                                                                                                                  dissemination.
                                                   18.3 Reinforce the quarantine services at borders and
                                                         regional cooperation and coordination to ensure that     Education, informal training and
                                                         effective mechanisms are in place for inspection at      awareness-raising materials, and their uses
                                                         borders, rapid detection and enforcement of              on occasion of training workshops for
                                                         quarantine regulations, so as to prevent introduction    example.
                                                         of invasive alien species;
                                                                                                                  Amount of information in the clearing-
                                                   18.4 Develop and disseminate national policies on the          house mechanisms.
                                                         management and prevention of IAS, building on
                                                         existing legal frameworks and ongoing work in the
                                                         context of the CBD and other international and
                                                         regional agreements110 ratified by Cambodia;

                                                   18.5 Develop education and awareness-raising

                                                   184
                                                                                                              National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Cambodia Biodiversity Target                           Specific actions                                           Indicators of progress towards the
                                                                                                                        achievement of the targets
                                                        programmes for decision-makers, administrators,
                                                        researchers, the private sector and the general public,  National biodiversity information/database
                                                        so that informed decisions can be taken at every         system has been strengthened and is
                                                        stage about how to limit introductions and their         operational.
                                                        spread. Education and awareness-raising materials        Coordination mechanisms have been
                                                        will include impact of IAS on human health and           established for information gathering and
                                                        socio-economies, information on the spread and           sharing among relevant institutions.
                                                        impacts of IAS in the LMB,                               Biodiversity status reports have been
                                                                                                                 developed and shared through the Clearing-
                                                  18.6 Enhance preparedness of the country to face IAS           House Mechanism including information
                                                        when they have been introduced by acquiring the          on threats to, and value of, biodiversity and
                                                        knowledge and technology for halting IAS spreads,        ecosystems.
                                                        e.g. through their containment and control of their      Educational programs, workshops and
                                                        density and abundance, preventing their re-              training activities are being carried out on
                                                        introduction, mitigating their damage, eradicating       the use of informational technology for
                                                        them if they have been introduced and have               biodiversity management.
                                                        established, and restoring damaged ecosystems; and       The clearing-house mechanism carries
                                                                                                                 some e-modules for training on aspects of
                                                  18.7 Develop and implement a financial mobilization plan.

Target 19 (Aichi Target 19111): By 2020, an       19.1 Improve the existing Clearing-House Mechanism
interoperable and user-friendly information             and its accessibility to serve at the science-policy
system containing data and information on               interface and facilitate more informed decision-
biodiversity (including its associated ecosystem        making; and
services) values, functions, status and trends,
and threats, and the consequences of its loss     19.2 Strengthen institutions and research providing data
has been established and maintained in the              and information on biodiversity (including its
responsible institutions for wide sharing               associated ecosystem services) values, functions,
among stakeholders.                                     status and trends, and threats, and the consequences
                                                        of its loss.
Activities under this target contribute to
practically all the strategic objectives

                                                  185
                                                                             National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Cambodia Biodiversity Target                               Specific actions                                              Indicators of progress towards the
                                                                                                                               achievement of the targets
Target 20 (Aichi Target 13112): By 2020, the          Drawing essentially on the Global Plan of Action for the
genetic diversity of cultivated plants and            Conservation and Sustainable Utilization of Plant Genetic         biodiversity.
farmed and domesticated animals, as well as           Resources for Food and Agriculture113, the Global Plan of
the genetic diversity of their wild relatives is      Action for Animal Genetic Resources and the Interlaken            Participation in GBIF.
protected and conserved in-situ and ex-situ.          Declaration114 and the International Initiative on
                                                      Biodiversity for Food and Nutrition adopted by the                Number of people using the Clearing-
This target is in line with themes 1 to 3 and 9 to    Conference of the Parties to the CBD115, Cambodia can             House Mechanism.
14 but the other themes are also relevant. It is      undertake the following actions to achieve its target on the
also linked to many other targets, in particular      protection of genetic diversity of cultivated plants and          Facilities in MOE are supported to host an
Target 1 on raising awareness about the status,       farmed and domesticated animals, as well as the genetic           efficient and effective CHM.
trends and values of biodiversity components;         diversity of their wild relatives:
Targets 4 and 5 on sustainable management of                                                                            Lists of (i) plant genetic resources for food
ecosystems that include the protection of genetic     20.1 Survey and inventory                                         and agriculture and genetic varieties of
resources and genetic diversity in those                                                                                other cultivated plants (e.g. ornamental);
ecosystems; Target 8 on establishment of                         plant genetic resources for food and agriculture       and (ii) animal genetic resources for food
effectively managed protected areas and                          and genetic varieties of other cultivated plants       and agriculture found in Cambodia
conservation areas that will protect, particularly               (e.g. ornamental); and
in their core areas, representative components of                                                                       Herbarium and collections of seeds or other
biodiversity; Target 10 for the protection of                    animal genetic resources for food and agriculture;     planting materials of wild relatives of plant
threatened species and thus the genetic diversity                                                                       genetic resources
of these species; and Target 12 for the reduction     20.2 Collect the wild relatives of plant genetic resources
of the loss of natural habitats where wild relatives        including in particular landraces on the verge of           Databases of traditional plant breeders,
of genetic resources can be found.                          extinction, and related scientific information,             animal breeders and curators of ex-situ
                                                            including traditional knowledge with the consent of         collections
                                                            local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities
                                                            in accordance with national legislation and policies;       Plant nurseries, germplasm facilities,
                                                                                                                        botanical and zoological gardens for
                                                      20.3 Characterize and classify                                    researching protection, conservation,
                                                                                                                        germination, breeding and local genetic
                                                                 the genetic diversity of cultivated plants and their   pools.
                                                                 wild relatives for morphological and agronomic
                                                                 traits, including at the molecular level if possible,  Laws on Genetic Resources (standard) for
                                                                                                                        internal and external investments.
                                                                 the genetic diversity of farmed and domesticated
                                                                                                                        Germination, transplantation, reproduction
                                                                                                                        and conservation of threatened flora
                                                                                                                        species, and reproduction of threatened
                                                                                                                        fauna.

                                                                                                                        Number of local genetic pools has been
                                                                                                                        established.

                                                                                                                        Number of relevant national legislations
                                                                                                                        and policy frameworks has been

                                                      186
                                   National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Cambodia Biodiversity Target                            Specific actions                         Indicators of progress towards the
                                                                                                       achievement of the targets
                                         animals, and organize the results in user-friendly
                                         databases;                                             established.

                              20.4 Inventory gene and seed banks existing in the                Development and strengthening of capacity
                                    country and in the region;                                  for using DNA based methods for species
                                                                                                identification and genetic diversity studies,
                              20.5 Undertake an inventory of traditional plant breeders,        and for parentage, population structure and
                                    animal breeders and curators of ex-situ collections,        ecosystem health studies.
                                    and involve them in the activities identified under
                                    this target;                                                Plans and policies to support ex-situ and in-
                                                                                                situ conservation, in particular conservation
                              20.6 Review plans and strategies that are in place to             of traditional and local plant varieties,
                                    maintain the plant and animal genetic diversity for         animal breeds; and plans, policies and
                                    food and agriculture and genetic diversity of other         means to support farmers involved in these
                                    planted species in-situ and ex-situ.                        activities

                              20.7 Develop and implement plans and policies for ex-situ         Support to existing ex-situ facilities and
                                    and in-situ conservation, and for the distribution of       their expansion
                                    germplasm (seed, tissues etc.).
                                                                                                Number of taxonomists and
                                         For in-situ conservation, support farmers in situ      parataxonomists
                                         conservation of traditional and local plant
                                         varieties, animal breeds, and efforts to conserve      Number of university research programmes
                                         crop wild relatives. Support farmers in situ           relating to the conservation of genetic
                                         conservation of traditional and local plant            resources
                                         varieties, animal breeds, and efforts to conserve
                                         crop wild relatives;                                   Collaboration with/agreements with FAO
                                                                                                and CGIAR centers for the long-term
                                         For ex-situ conservation, expand existing              conservation of selected accessions at
                                         facilities and establish new ones (seed banks,         international standards.
                                         gene banks, botanical and zoological gardens
                                         etc.) at the local, provincial and national level for  Markets created for local wild plants and
                                         maintaining, evaluating, documenting and the           animals, for rare and threatened plant
                                         distribution of germplasm. Maintain genetic            species and animal breeds and for
                                         materials in ways that will preserve viability and     underutilized species in ways that will
                                         genetic stability over long periods of time and        promote conservation and sustainable use
                                         evaluate them regularly. Support collections and       of these species.
                                         exploration for the collection of wild relatives
                                         with emphasis on threatened genetic resources.         Amount of seeds and other planting
                                         Consider opportunity of placing some accession         materials.
                                         in-trust with FAO so that they can be maintained
                                                                                                Biodiversity-friendly breeding and seed
                                                                                                laws, regulations and standards.

                              187
                                   National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Cambodia Biodiversity Target                            Specific actions                     Indicators of progress towards the
                                                                                                  achievement of the targets
                                         at international standards;

                              20.8 Enhance the protection of the genetic diversity of
                                    cultivated plants and farmed and domesticated
                                    animals, as well as the genetic diversity of their wild
                                    relatives by ensuring their sustainable use through:

                                         the sustainable use of economically valuable
                                         local wild plants and animals, as an income
                                         generating activity for local inhabitants;

                                         the marketing of products from rare and
                                         threatened plant species and animal breeds;

                                         the development and commercialization of all
                                         varieties, primarily farmers varieties/landraces
                                         and underutilized species;

                                         seed production and distribution;

                                         promotion of traditional knowledge and
                                         customary sustainable uses; and

                                         the establishment and strengthening of
                                         national sustainable use policies.

                              20.9 Enhance the enabling conditions, including by:

                                         fostering collaboration and coordination at the
                                         national, regional and international levels with
                                         universities and research institutions, and the
                                         Consultative Group of International
                                         Agricultural Research Centres for examples;

                                         strengthening the national clearing-house
                                         mechanism to handle data and information on
                                         plant genetic resources for food and
                                         agriculture, other plant genetic diversity and
                                         animal genetic diversity;

                                         developing and strengthening systems for
                                         monitoring;

                                         creating economic incentives for in situ
                                         conservation by farmers;

                              188
                                                                                 National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

Cambodia Biodiversity Target                     Specific actions                Indicators of progress towards the
                                                                                      achievement of the targets
                                   developing and strengthening biodiversity-
                                   friendly breeding and seed laws, regulations
                                   and standards;
                                   strengthening public awareness of the
                                   importance of plant and animal genetic
                                   resources for food and agriculture and other
                                   cultivated plant varieties; and
                                   Mobilizing funds from diverse sources.

                              189
                                                                                                                        National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

                                                               ANNEX 1

      Indicative list of laws, strategies and plans of relevance to the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan
                                                      adopted by Cambodia since 2002

Year Law, strategy or plan                          Relevance to biodiversity

                                              Laws

2015 Law on Production and               A draft law on animal health and production is expected to be approved by the December 2015 deadline of the Asean
          Animal health116,              Economic Community (AEC). The law includes better management of livestock production and health, and protections for
                                         consumer health and local breeds to ensure a sustainable livestock production in Cambodia.

                                         http://www.cambodianewsgazette.com/2902/livestock-law-near-approval

2012 Law on the Management               This law aims to define the management of all pesticides and fertilizers in the Kingdom of Cambodia in a way that reduces
          of Pesticides and Fertilizers  possible risks from their uses for food security, food safety, public health, and the sustainability of environment; To enhance
                                         public awareness (Articles 1 and 2)
                                         https://view.officeapps.live.com/op/view.aspx?src=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.worldsbestrice.biz%2FLaw%2520on%2520manag
                                         ement%2520of%2520pesticides%2520and%2520fertilizers%2520Eng.doc

2009 Law on Tourism                      The purpose of this law is: Govern the development of the tourism sector in a sustainable manner, effectively and
                                         qualitatively, with a view of reducing poverty; protect and conserve the natural resources, culture and customs, which serve as
2008 Protected Areas Law                 the foundation of the tourism sector; minimize the negative impacts of the tourism sector, while maximizing the positive
2008 Law on Biosafety                    impacts (Article 2).

2008  Law on Seed                        http://www.tourismcambodia.org/camtourismlaw/index.php
      Management and Plant
      Breeders Right                     The objectives of this law are to ensure the management, conservation of biodiversity, and sustainable use of natural resources
                                         in protected areas (Article 1).

                                         http://www.cambodiainvestment.gov.kh/law-on-nature-protection-area-protected-areas-law_080104_080104.html

                                         [...] Prevent adverse impact on the conservation of biodiversity and natural resources in the Kingdom of Cambodia caused by
                                         the transboundary movement, development, handling, transfer, use, storage, and release of living modified organisms resulting
                                         from modern biotechnology;

                                         Ensure the effective conservation of biodiversity and the sustainable use of biological resources, taking into account risks to
                                         human health (Article 1).

                                         http://www.bch-moe.gov.kh/userfiles/image/document/National%20Law%20on%20Biosafety.pdf

                                         The purpose of this Law is to manage and control the breeding, release for use, production, processing, registration,
                                         distribution, import and export of seeds, and to protect new plant varieties in the Kingdom of Cambodia (Article 1). Also to
                                         secure the management and sustainable development of varieties and to encourage the development thereof for social,

                                         190
2008  Law on Administrative                                                                                                 National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016
      Management of the
2007  Capital, Provinces,        economic, and environmental benefits (Article 2).
2006  Municipalities, Districts  http://eapvp.org/library/member/pdf/Khmer_UPOV_Act-Eng-Final.pdf
2006  and Khans, Royal Kram
2003  No. NS/RKM/0508/017.       Among others, functioning, roles and duties of authorities at the provincial and lower levels.
2002  Kingdom of Cambodia        http://www.cdc-crdb.gov.kh/cdc/twg_network/country_systems_cambodia/strengthening_national_systems/documents_for_
      Law on Water Resources     reform/sndd/organic_law_2008_en.pdf
2013  Management of the
      Kingdom of Cambodia        Water and water resources shall be managed and developed based on an integrated water resources management (IWRM).The
      Law on Fisheries           principle of Integrated Water Resource Management requires coordinated multi-sectoral water use planning, including the
                                 need for conservation of biodiversity and ecosystems.
      Law on Administration
      of Factory and             The purpose is to ensure fisheries and fishery resource management, enhance aquaculture development, the management of
      Handicraft                 production and processing, and promote the livelihood of people in local communities for the social-economic and
      Sub-Decree N0.79 on        environmental benefits, including the sustainability of the conservation of biodiversity and natural culture heritages in the
      Community Forestry         Kingdom of Cambodia (Article 1).
      Management_031202          http://faolex.fao.org/docs/pdf/cam82001.pdf

      Law on Forestry            This law has provisions on pollution, wastes, environmental safety and the like.
                                 http://www.cambodiainvestment.gov.kh/law-on-administration-of-factory-and-handicraft_060623.html
      Cambodia Climate
      Change Strategic Plan      Article 1: This sub-decree aims at determining rules for the establishment, management and use of community forests
      2014 ­ 2023                throughout the Kingdom of Cambodia.
                                 http://www.cambodiainvestment.gov.kh/sub-decree-79-on-community-forestry-management_031202.html

                                 For management, harvesting, use, development and conservation of the forests in the Kingdom of Cambodia. The objective of
                                 this law is to ensure the sustainable management of these forests for their social, economic and environmental benefits,
                                 including conservation of biological diversity and cultural heritage (Article 1).
                                 http://www.forestry.gov.kh/Documents/Forestry%20Law_Eng.pdf

                                                                   Approaches, strategies and plans

                                 The RGC has launched the CCCSP as a continuation of national policy response, in providing a framework for climate change
                                 responses and guiding the transition to low-carbon and climate resilient development. The CCCSP supports national
                                 preparedness in responding to climate risks and disaster management, and in capitalizing on emerging opportunities such as
                                 green growth, mobilizing climate funds from bilateral and multilateral sources, and enhancing effective participation in
                                 international dialogues and negotiations on climate change, both at regional and global levels.

                                 191
                                     National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

2010  National Strategic        The National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) (2009-2013) serves as the ,,roadmap for implementing the RS-Phase II
2010  Development Plan          (explained above) and it aims to support the sustainable use of all natural resources in the country. The NSDP outlines the
2010  update (2009-2013)        importance of conserving Cambodias unique natural heritage and biodiversity, along with enhancing environmental
2010                            sustainability, sustainable economic growth, poverty reduction, and improvements in the lives of rural communities. In
2010  National Forest           addition, the NSDP sets a national target of 60% forest cover, 450 approved Community Forests and reducing fuel-wood
2010  Programme 2010 - 2029     dependence by 2013. It also recognizes the importance of REDD+ and greenhouse gas mitigation projects in mitigating
                                climate change (http://www.4cmr.group.cam.ac.uk/filecab/redd-law-project/20140819%20Introduction%20to%20REDD-
      National Strategic        %20Governance%20in%20Cambodia.pdf).
      Development Plan
      Update 20092013           The National Forest Programme (NFP) 2010-2029 aims to achieve sustainable forest management and also to alleviate poverty
      (NSDP Update, 2009        in Cambodia. Specifically, it identifies objectives and goals in developing and managing forests to improve livelihoods,
      2013)                     environmental services and overall economic development. Importantly, it aims to ensure that the management and
      Strategy For Agriculture  exploitation of forests generates benefits for government entities, local communities, the private sector and individuals. The
      And Water 2010-2013       NFP has aims to register 1,000 community forestry groups nationally, and for community forest programmes to cover 2.0
                                million hectares by 2030. The NFP has also identified REDD+ as an important source of sustainable forest financing
      Cambodia REDD+            (http://www.4cmr.group.cam.ac.uk/filecab/redd-law-project/20140819%20Introduction%20to%20REDD-%20
      National Roadmap          Governance%20in%20Cambodia.pdf).

      The Rural Water Supply,   Covers all aspects of sustainable development. Also chapters on Enhancement of the Agricultural Sector I. Improving
                                Agricultural Productivity and Diversification; II. Land Reform and De-Mining; III. Fisheries Reform; and IV. Forestry
                                Reform. And Chapters on capacity building and human resources and on investments.

                                http://www.paris21.org/sites/default/files/Cambodia_NSDP_Update_2009-2013-English.pdf

                                Objectives: The Strategy is intended to rapidly improve food security status and reducing the poverty rates in Cambodia. It is
                                intended as a national framework to guide the planning and programming of interventions for this purpose by concerned
                                cooperating national and international agencies in Cambodia. The Program is identified as being instrumental for contributing
                                to achieving the overall development goal of the NSDP, with its particular focus on improving the institutional and
                                management capacity of MAFF and MOWRAM. At the same time, the Program will also benefit farmers and the agricultural
                                sector by providing an effective means of improving the success rates of agricultural and water sector programs, promoting
                                greater diversity in agricultural production, and improving the competitiveness of the agricultural sector
                                (http://www.foodsecurity.gov.kh/node/550).

                                The Cambodia REDD+ National Roadmap outlines a national plan for ,,REDD+ Readiness activities. According to this
                                document, all forestlands are Public State Property (except forests under indigenous land titles and private forests), and
                                therefore the majority of forest carbon is owned by the State with the forest carbon in private forests belonging to their owners
                                (http://www.4cmr.group.cam.ac.uk/filecab/redd-law-project/20140819%20Introduction%20to%20REDD-
                                %20Governance%20in%20Cambodia.pdf).

                                http://theredddesk.org/sites/default/files/8_redd_roadmap_cambodia_v4_0_official_222_5.pdf

                                This Strategy Paper defines the water supply, sanitation and hygiene services to be made available to people living in rural

                                192
                                     National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

2009  Sanitation and Hygiene    areas and the institutional arrangements and the financial, human and other resources necessary to sustainably provide these
      Strategy 2010 ­ 2025      services.
2009  The National Green
2009  Growth Roadmap 2013-      Cambodia was the first LDC in the region to develop a National Green Growth Roadmap in 2010. The National Green Growth
2008  2030                      Roadmap is produced by Cambodia for furthering development to benefit the people and conserve and restore the natural
2008                            capital base to continue economic growth within the limits posed by the environmental carrying capacity. The Roadmap
      National Sustainable      proposes possible paths for short, medium, and longterm implementation of green growth in Cambodia. In doing so it suggests
      Development Strategy      win-win-win situations between economy, environment and society to show that economic growth, environmental
                                sustainability and human well-being can be achieved. Adopting a holistic approach to development will help the country
      Declaration on Land       improve resilience and decrease vulnerability to climate change. The National Green Growth Roadmap focuses on addressing
      Policy (2009)             the following seven goals: Access to clean water and sanitation, Access to renewable energy, Access to information and
                                knowledge, Access to means for better mobility, Access to finance and investments, Access to food security (agriculture) and
      The Rectangular Strategy  non-chemical products, and Access to sustainable landuse.
      Phase II
                                http://www.greengrowth.org/sites/default/files/pictures/Final%20Draft%20Roadmap%2C%20Feb26-2010.pdf
      Health Strategic Plan
      2005-2015                 The NSDS document provides a conceptual framework for formulation of the comprehensive sustainable development
      Follow-up to "Health      strategy for the Royal Kingdom of Cambodia.
      Strategic Plan 2003-
                                There are sections on Sustainability of the national resources and environment and on sustainable economic sectors and
                                infrastructure with subsections on Sustainable Land Use and Agriculture, Sustainable Forestry, Sustainable Water Resource
                                Management, Sustainable Fishery, Sustainable Mining, Private Sector and Sustainable Business Development, Sustainable
                                Tourism, Sustainable Energy, Sustainable Water Supply and Sanitation.
                                http://www.rrcap.ait.asia/nsds/uploadedfiles/file/Publication%202-NSDS%20Cambodia.pdf

                                The Declaration on Land Policy (2009) focuses on three sub-sectors:18 land administration, land management, and land
                                distribution. The objective of land management is to ensure management, protection and use of land and natural resources with
                                transparency and efficiency in order to preserve environmental sustainability and equitable socio-economic development in
                                rural and urban areas as well as to prevent disputes over land-use by regulating land development, land conversion, land
                                readjustment, construction, and resettlement (http://www.4cmr.group.cam.ac.uk/filecab/redd-law-
                                project/20140819%20Introduction%20to%20REDD-%20Governance%20in%20Cambodia.pdf).

                                The Rectangular Strategy (RS)-Phase II (2008-2013) is a national socio-economic development policy agenda. This strategy
                                focuses on four main components, including (1) agriculture development, (2) infrastructure rehabilitation development, (3)
                                private sector development and employment creation, and (4) capacity building and human resource development. The key
                                priorities for forestry reform include law enforcement, effective management of protected areas, climate change actions and
                                the promotion of community forestry programs. Also, the RS-Phase II contains provisions aiming to ensure sustainable forest
                                management, protect biodiversity and promote community forestry programs in the country.

                                To address health needs of the population during the eight coming years by using the opportunity offered by the Royal
                                Government of Cambodia to maximum extent possible, as the improvement in health status of all Cambodians is recognized
                                by the Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC) as a priority for investing national resources in the social sector.

                                Vision: "to enhance sustainable development of the health sector for better health and well-being of all Cambodian, especially

                                193
2008  2007"                                                                                                                National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

2007  The Royal Government      of the poor, women and children, thereby contributing to poverty alleviation and socio-economic development."
2006  of Cambodias              http://www.wpro.who.int/health_services/cambodia_nationalhealthplan.pdf
2006  Rectangular Strategy
      2009-2013, 117            the Royal Government of Cambodias Rectangular Strategy 2009-2013, 118which includes: Land Reform and De-mining
2005                            (Distribution of land, Land management and utilization including Land registration and tenure security); Fishery Reform
      Strategic Framework for   (Transformation of additional fishing lots as fishery conservation areas and community fishing grounds); and Forestry Reform
      Food Security and         (Sustainable forest management policy, Protected Areas System, and Community forestry). A focus of the Rectangular
      Nutrition in Cambodia     Strategy is on addressing enhancement of the agricultural sector by improving productivity and intensifying the agricultural
      2007-2010 (SFFSN).        sector. The strategy states the need to maximize agricultural production and ensure sustainable use and management of natural
      The National Strategic    resources and maintaining biodiversity.
      Development Plan
      (NSDP), 2006- 2010        Agriculture and agricultural production and productivity.
                                http://s3.amazonaws.com/zanran_storage/www.foodsecurity.gov.kh/ContentPages/2447607584.pdf
      National Adaptation
      Programme of Action to    The National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) 2006-2010 aims to ensure that land and natural resources are used in an
      Climate Change (NAPA)     efficient manner to support sustainable and equitable socioeconomic development for all Cambodian citizens. The Plan The
                                NSDP incorporates the Cambodia Millennium Development Goals (CMDGs), formulated with UN support in 2003, updated
      Integrated Water          in 2005 and published as the Cambodian Millennium Development Goals Report. The NSDP provides the framework and
      Resources Management      compass for growth, employment, equity and efficiency to reach the CMDGs.
      Strategy and Roadmaps
      in Cambodia               From http://www.adaptationlearning.net/cambodia-napa or http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/napa/khm01.pdf
                                The NAPA identifies priority activities that respond to urgent and immediate needs to adapt to climate change ­ those for
                                which further delay would increase vulnerability and/or costs at a later stage. The Programme document includes: (i) the main
                                characteristics of climate hazards in Cambodia (flood, drought, windstorm, high tide, salt water intrusion and malaria); (ii)
                                coping mechanisms to climate hazards and climate change at the grassroots level; (iii) existing programmes and institutional
                                arrangements for addressing climate hazards and climate change; and (iv) prioritized adaptation activities to climate hazards
                                and climate change.

                                This document sets out strategic directions for development of water resources in Cambodia for the next 20 years. It is
                                intended to lend guidance to sustainable water resource development and management in Cambodia, and is relevant to all
                                stakeholders. It aims to synthesize directions identified in national plans and strategies and add a basin dimension, and to
                                promote the approach of Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) within the Basin.
                                http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTPRS1/Resources/Country-Papers-and-JSAs/cambodia_PRSP2.pdf

2004  The Rectangular Strategy  "It provides a clear and focused framework for the country's socio economic development and, at the same time, serves as the
      for Growth,               Economic Policy Agenda of the Political Platform of the Royal Government in its Third Legislature of the National Assembly,
      Employment, Equity and    2004-08. Founded on good governance, peace, political stability, social order, macroeconomic stability, partnership and
      Efficiency in Cambodia    economic integration, the Rectangular Strategy focuses on critical development issues such as the enhancement of the

                                194
2003 Cambodia Millennium                                                                                                National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016
          Development Goals
                             agricultural sector, rehabilitation and construction of physical infrastructure, private sector development and employment
2002  National Poverty       generation, and capacity building and human resource development. [...] The National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) is
      Reduction Strategy     the operationalization of the Rectangular Strategy"
      (NPRS: 2003-2005)
                             "The Cambodia Millennium Development Goals (CMDGs) were formulated with UN support in 2003, updated in 2005 and
                             published as the Cambodian Millennium Development Goals Report. The NSDP provides the framework and compass for
                             growth, employment, equity and efficiency to reach the CMDGs. Each of the nine CMDGs has been disaggregated into
                             several sub-CMDGs with 25 overall targets and 106 specific targets for 2005, 2010 and 2015."

                             http://www.mop.gov.kh/Default.aspx?tabid=156

                             The Strategy describes the country's macroeconomic, structural and social policies and programs to promote growth and
                             reduce poverty, as well as associated external financing needs and major sources of financing. It is a comprehensive approach,
                             outlining pro-poor actions to improve rural livelihoods (including through improved access to land, promoting agricultural
                             development, water resource management and irrigation and drainage development, roads and transport, promoting job
                             opportunities, ensuring better health, nutrition and education outcomes, and promoting sustainable management and use of
                             natural resources and the environment.

                             195
               National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

ENDNOTES

1 In decision X/2, the Conference of the Parties urged Parties to review, revise and update, as appropriate, their NBSAPs in line with the Strategic Plan
for Biodiversity 2011-2020. In addition, Aichi Biodiversity Target 17 calls for Parties to develop, adopt as a policy instrument, and commence
implementing an effective, participatory and updated NBSAP by 2015.
2 Laws, strategies and plans consulted are listed in Annex 1
3 5th National Report
4 Greater Mekong-Economic Analysis of Ecosystem Services, November-2013, WWF
5 See e.g., paragraph 7 of Decision XI/30 of the CBD Conference of the Parties
6 In line with the Royal Government principle of national solidarity
7 From CCCSP
8 NSDP Update 2009-2013
9 MAFF Annual Report 2012-2013
10 National Forest Programme (2010)
11 The Third National Report to CBD (2006)
12 National Ecotourism Policy and Strategic Plan; MOT; SNV and the SRC, USC, 2010
13 The Fifth National Report to CBD (2014)
14 See in particular Cambodia Biodiversity Target 8 in Table 29 below.
15 World Bank
16 http://www.unep.org/10yfp/About/tabid/106242/Default.aspx
17http://www.unep.org/resourceefficiency/Portals/24147/scp/marrakech/dialogue/pdf/1_Present_SCP_CAMBODIA_ SAM.pdf
18 from CMDG/Goal 9
19 http://www.wepa-db.net/policies/law/cambodia/02.htm
20 http://www.gmac-cambodia.org/legal/data/Sub_Degree_on_Solid_Waste_Management.pdf
21 Forestry Administration, 2007 and 2010
22 http://www.fadinap.org/cambodia
23 The Fifth National Report under the CBD (2014)
24 The Fifth National Report to CBD (2014)
25 NSDP Update 2009-2013
26 http://faolex.fao.org/docs/pdf/cam82965.pdf
27 http://faolex.fao.org/docs/pdf/cam85864.pdf
28 The Fourth National Report to CBD (2010)
29 Sub-decree on Community Fisheries (2005)
30 The Fifth National Report to CBD (2014)
31 Fourth National Report to CBD
32 The Fifth National Report to CBD (2014)
33 NSDP Update 2009-2013
34 MAFF Annual Report 2009-2013
35 The Third National Report to CBD (2006)
36 Also see MAFF strategic goals
37 Text essentially from CBD
38 An account of these instruments and tools are accessible at http://www.cbd.int/abs/instruments/default.shtml
39 Article 5 on "Cooperation"; Article 7 on "Identification and Monitoring"; Article 8 on "In-situ Conservation", in particular Article 8(j) with its
provision to encourage the equitable sharing of the benefits arising from the utilization of knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous and

local communities embodying traditional lifestyles relevant for conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity; Article 9 on "Ex-situ
Conservation"; Article 10 on "Sustainable Use of Components of Biological Diversity"; Article 11 on "Incentive Measures"; Article 12 on "Research
and Training"; Article 13 on "Public Education and Awareness"; Article 16 on "Access to and Transfer of Technology"; Article 17 on "Exchange of
Information"; Article 18 on "Technical and Scientific Cooperation"; and Article 19 on "Handling of Biotechnology and Distribution of its Benefits"
(particularly in its paragraphs 1 and 2); Articles 20 and 21 on financial resources and financial mechanism respectively.
40 UNEP/CBD/NP/COP-MOP/1/L.6
41 UNEP/CBD/NP/COP-MOP/1/L.7
42 http://satoyama-initiative.org/en/
43 Indicators: http://www.cbd.int/doc/meetings/tk/wg8j-08/official/wg8j-08-09-en.pdf
44 UNEP/CBD/COP/12/L.7
45 Mainly drawn from the Annex to document UNEP/CBD/COP/12/5
46 http://www.cbd.int/ecosystem/
47 http://www.cbd.int/sustainable/addis.shtml
48 UNEP 2011, Manufacturing - Investing in energy and resource efficiency. Green Economy Report
49 Rio + 20 and manufacturing and green industries (from
http://unep.org/greeneconomy/Portals/88/GETReport/pdf/Chapitre%205%20Manufacturing.pdf)
50 The Training Manual on Risk Assessment and Risk Management was developed and published in December 2008 as part of technical assistance
project facilitated by the UNEP and financed by the GEF through a project on Cambodia
51 National Law on Biosafety (2008): the objective of this law is to prevent adverse impact on the conservation of biodiversity and natural resources in
the Kingdom of Cambodia caused by the transboundary movement, development, handling, transfer, use, storage, and release of LMOs resulting from
modern biotechnology
52www.cambodiabiosafety.org

          196
                                                                                   National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

53 In Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan
54 Projection from Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan
55 See Green Growth Roadmap
56 See Green Growth Roadmap
57 Cambodia acceded to the Supplementary Protocol on Aug 30, 2013
58 COP 12 request in decision on tourism
59 developed under the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD COP decision VIII/28)
60 E.g. http://www.cbd.int/doc/publications/ecotour-brochure-en.pdf
61 E.g. http://www.treeseedfa.org/uploaddocuments/CapacityNeedsassessment.pdf
62 See http://www.cbd.int/financial/doc/id482-se-asia-financial-planning-en.pdf
63 Fifth National Report
64 The Fifth National Report to CBD (2014)
65 As described in the Green Growth Roadmap, ecovillages are urban or rural communities of people, who strive to integrate a supportive social
environment with a lowimpact way of life. To achieve this, they integrate various aspects of ecological design, permaculture, ecological building,
green production, alternative energy, community building practices, and much more
66 Fourth National Report to CBD.
67 The Fourth National Report to CBD (2010)
68 http://www.tematea.org/
69 http://www.millenniumassessment.org/documents/document.765.aspx.pdf and http://ipbes.net/
70 Under the Convention on Biological Diversity. Decisions V/6 and VII/11
71 based on http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Landscape
72 From the Satoyama Initiative accessible at http://satoyama-initiative.org/en
73 http://www.blm.gov/wo/st/en/prog/more/Landscape_Approach/landscapequestions.html
74 Aichi Target 1: By 2020, at the latest, people are aware of the values of biodiversity and the steps they can take to conserve and use it sustainably.
75 Aichi Target 20: By 2020, at the latest, the mobilization of financial resources for effectively implementing the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-
2020 from all sources, and in accordance with the consolidated and agreed process in the Strategy for Resource Mobilization, should increase
substantially from the current levels. This target will be subject to changes contingent to resource needs assessments to be developed and reported by
Parties.
76 Article 32 of the 2008 Protected Areas Law
77 Environment endowment fund Article 19 in the 1996 Law on Environmental Protection and Natural Resource Management
78 Article 62 National Forestry Development Fund in 2002 Law on Forestry. Also see CIs experience in setting up the Cardamoms Protected Forest
trust fund
79 By 2020, at the latest, biodiversity values have been integrated into national and local development and poverty reduction strategy and planning
processes and are being incorporated into national accounting, as appropriate, and reporting systems.
80 Decision X/3 of the CBD Conference of the Parties: All Parties provided with adequate financial resources, will have, by 2015 assessed and/or
evaluated the intrinsic value, ecological, genetic, social economic, scientific, educational, cultural, recreational and aesthetic values of biological
diversity and its components
81 http://www.greengrowth.org/?q=publication/national-green-growth-roadmap-cambobia#sthash.2XqbfMJ7.dpuf
82 Aichi Target 6: By 2020 all fish and invertebrate stocks and aquatic plants are managed and harvested sustainably, legally and applying ecosystem
based approaches, so that overfishing is avoided, recovery plans and measures are in place for all depleted species, fisheries have no significant
adverse impacts on threatened species and vulnerable ecosystems and the impacts of fisheries on stocks, species and ecosystems are within safe
ecological limits.
83 For more detailed targets and indicators, see the Strategic Planning Framework for Fisheries: 2010-2019 Cambodia
(http://www.issuelab.org/resource/strategic_planning_framework_for_fisheries_2010_2019_cambodia).Annex1 contains concrete targets, milestones
and indicators
84 These could be supported by Asian Species Action Partnership (ASAP)
85 Aichi Target 7: By 2020, areas under agriculture, aquaculture and forestry are managed sustainably, ensuring the conservation of biodiversity.
86 Agriculture is a broad term that encompasses the cultivation of animals, plants, fungi, and other life forms for the purposes of providing food, fibber,
and other products used to sustain life. The variety and variability of animals, plants and microorganisms used in agriculture is an important aspect of
biodiversity. However some agricultural practices are also a major cause of biodiversity loss (http://www.cbd.int/doc/strategic-plan/targets/T7-quick-
guide-en.pdf).
87 Aquaculture refers to the cultivation of fish, crustaceans, mollusks and aquatic plants. It can occur in both inland water and marine environments.
Aquaculture can be contrasted with commercial fishing which is the harvest of wild aquatic organisms (http://www.cbd.int/doc/strategic-
plan/targets/T7-quick-guide-en.pdf).
88 Forestry refers to the interdisciplinary process of establishing, managing, using, and conserving forests and their associated resources. As such,
forestry encompasses not just trees, but the multitude of plants, animals and micro-organisms that inhabit forest areas and the ways in which they are
used. Forestry can occur in all types of forests from plantations to primary forests.
89 Aichi Target 14: By 2020, ecosystems that provide essential services, including services related to water, and contribute to health, livelihoods and
well-being, are restored and safeguarded, taking into account the needs of women, indigenous and local communities, and the poor and vulnerable.
90 Aichi Target 4: By 2020, at the latest, Governments, business and stakeholders at all levels have taken steps to achieve or have implemented plans
for sustainable production and consumption and have kept the impacts of use of natural resources well within safe ecological limits.
91Recently, Cambodia was found to have an ecological footprint of 1.0 (2010) and a biological capacity of 0.9 (2010). This means the country has a
deficit of 0.1 (http://11saekre.wordpress.com/2010/11/15/cambodia-ecological-footprint/).
92 The existence, development and application of these incentives is a sign that Government has taken steps.
93 Aichi Target 11: By 2020, at least 17 per cent of terrestrial and inland water, and 10 per cent of coastal and marine areas, especially areas of
particular importance for biodiversity and ecosystem services, are conserved through effectively and equitably managed, ecologically representative
and well-connected systems of protected areas and other effective area-based conservation measures, and integrated into the wider landscapes and
seascapes.

                                                               197
                                                                                   National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016

94 http://www.phnompenhpost.com/national/coral-reef-areas-gain-protection-cambodia
95http://www.cbd.int/doc/pa/tools/Making%20Protected%20Areas%20Relevant%20A%20guide%20to%20Integrating%20Protected%20Areas.pdf
96 Aichi Target 3: By 2020, at the latest, incentives, including subsidies, harmful to biodiversity are eliminated, phased out or reformed in order to
minimize or avoid negative impacts, and positive incentives for the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity are developed and applied,
consistent and in harmony with the Convention and other relevant international obligations, taking into account national socio economic conditions.
97 Aichi Target 12: By 2020 the extinction of known threatened species has been prevented and their conservation status, particularly of those most in
decline, has been improved and sustained
98 Aichi Target 15: By 2020, ecosystem resilience and the contribution of biodiversity to carbon stocks has been enhanced, through conservation and
restoration, including restoration of at least 15% of degraded ecosystems, thereby contributing to climate change mitigation and adaptation and to
combating desertification.
99 Aichi Target 5: By 2020, the rate of loss of all natural habitats, including forests, is at least halved and where feasible brought close to zero, and
degradation and fragmentation is significantly reduced.
100 Some target for 2029 in the National Forest Programme document
101 Aichi Target 16: By 2015, the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their
Utilization is in force and operational, consistent with national legislation.
102 Aichi Target 17: By 2015 each Party has developed, adopted as a policy instrument, and has commenced implementing an effective, participatory
and updated national biodiversity strategy and action plan.
103 Aichi Target 10: By 2015, the multiple anthropogenic pressures on coral reefs, and other vulnerable ecosystems impacted by climate change or
ocean acidification are minimized, so as to maintain their integrity and functioning.
104 Aichi Target 8: By 2020, pollution, including from excess nutrients, has been brought to levels that are not detrimental to ecosystem function and
biodiversity.
105 In 5th National report : MoE has one department responsible for environment pollution control with one Lab for polluted water analysis
106 Aichi Target 18: By 2020, the traditional knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous and local communities relevant for the conservation
and sustainable use of biodiversity, and their customary use of biological resources, are respected, subject to national legislation and relevant
international obligations, and fully integrated and reflected in the implementation of the Convention with the full and effective participation of
indigenous and local communities, at all relevant levels.
107 Namely themes 1, 2, 10, 11, 12, 15 and 24
108 Aichi Target 9: By 2020, invasive alien species and pathways are identified and prioritized, priority species are controlled or eradicated, and
measures are in place to manage pathways to prevent their introduction and establishment.
109 http://cmsdata.iucn.org/downloads/mlb_ias_current_state_of_play.pdf
110 See an indicative list at http://www.cbd.int/invasive/done.shtml
111 Aichi Target 19: By 2020, knowledge, the science base and technologies relating to biodiversity, its values, functioning, status and trends, and the
consequences of its loss, are improved, widely shared and transferred, and applied
112 Aichi Target 13: By 2020, the genetic diversity of cultivated plants and farmed and domesticated animals and of wild relatives, including other
socio-economically as well as culturally valuable species, is maintained, and strategies have been developed and implemented for minimizing genetic
erosion and safeguarding their genetic diversity.
113 www.fao.org/agriculture/crops/core-themes/theme/seeds-pgr/gpa/en/
114 www.fao.org/docrep/010/a1404e/a1404e00.htm
115 http://www.cbd.int/agro/food-nutrition/elements.shtml
116 http://www.cambodianewsgazette.com/2902/livestock-law-near-approval
117Royal Government of Cambodias Rectangular Strategy 2009-2013 (2004)

                                                               198
                     Department of Biodiversity
   General Secretariat of the National Council for Sustainable

              Development / Ministry of Environment

©2016 Department of Biodiversity, General Secretariat of the National Council for
Sustainable Development / Ministry of Environment , Kingdom of Cambodia. All rights
reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or
by any means without the permission of the copyright holder.
