      RAPID INTEGRATED ASSESSMENT ­ LIBERIA SDG PROFILE

UNDP undertook a Rapid Integrated Assessment of Liberia's Agenda for Transformation (AFT) 2012-2017
complemented with reference to the Economic and Stabilization and Recovery Plan (ESRP) of April 2015
which seeks to identify strategic interventions to stabilize and promote rapid economic and social
recovery following the Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) crisis in Liberia. The assessment provides a gap analysis
of the SDG targets not prioritized in the AFT. Such analysis can inform the formulation of the next Liberia's
national development plan facilitating alignment to the SDGs based on national priorities.
Template 1 provides a quick visual overview of the SDG targets integrated in the 2012-2017 AFT and those
that are not. It also shows the SDG targets that are prioritized by multiple sectors as captured in the AFT
and the ESRP and missing linkages across sectors.

                                                                                                                               1
Template 2 provides further details, including specific reference to goals and targets drawn from the AFT,
and ESRP which constitute the starting point of the alignment analysis (different to the mapping exercise
of the AFT against the SDG and Agenda 2063 undertaken at national level which took as the starting point
the AFT key indicators). Template 2 shows as well (i) national indicators for specific targets drawn from
the 52 key indicators of the AFT validated in 2014 and the AFT itself,1 and (ii) responsible or lead institution
overseeing implementation of the target.

The following observations result from the assessment:
    1. The AFT prioritizes 65 SDG targets out of 106 (169 SDG targets minus 43 on means of
         implementation under each of the goals; 19 targets of Goal 17 on partnerships and target 14.7
         which do not apply to developing countries). The analysis shows important gaps in terms of
         alignment which may help inform the formulation of the next national development plan to either
         confirm such SDG targets do not constitute priority at national level or work towards inclusion of
         relevant targets in the next planning process.
    2. The SDG targets listed below are not integrated in the AFT. Since the analysis is based on the AFT
         and ESRP only, consideration of sectoral policies and strategies may reduce these gaps and should
         be taken into account while formulating the next national development plan to factor in the
         results and lessons learned from the implementation such policies and strategies.

1 The Key indicators are meant to facilitate the monitoring of AFT implementation in terms of the direction and
pace of progress, give insights and impulses to stakeholders on whether progress is in line with the AFT, and
facilitate coordination. Source: LDA Proposed national key indicators to monitor the AFT, ppt presentation, 2014.

                                                                                                                               2
 2.5 By 2020, maintain the genetic diversity of seeds, cultivated plants and farmed and

    domesticated animals and their related wild species, including through soundly managed
    and diversified seed and plant banks at the national, regional and international levels, and
    ensure access to and fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of
    genetic resources and associated traditional knowledge, as internationally agreed

 3.4 By 2030, reduce by one third premature mortality from non-communicable diseases

    through prevention and treatment and promote mental health and well-being

 3.5 Strengthen the prevention and treatment of substance abuse, including narcotic drug

    abuse and harmful use of alcohol

 3.6 By 2020, halve the number of global deaths and injuries from road traffic accidents
 3.7 By 2030, ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health-care services,

    including for family planning, information and education, and the integration of
    reproductive health into national strategies and programmes

 3.9 By 2030, substantially reduce the number of deaths and illnesses from hazardous

    chemicals and air, water and soil pollution and contamination

 5.4 Recognize and value unpaid care and domestic work through the provision of public

    services, infrastructure and social protection policies and the promotion of shared
    responsibility within the household and the family as nationally appropriate

 5.6 Ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health and reproductive rights as

    agreed in accordance with the Programme of Action of the International Conference on
    Population and Development and the Beijing Platform for Action and the outcome
    documents of their review conferences

 6.4 By 2030, substantially increase water-use efficiency across all sectors and ensure

    sustainable withdrawals and supply of freshwater to address water scarcity and
    substantially reduce the number of people suffering from water scarcity

 12.1 Implement the 10-year framework of programmes on sustainable consumption and

    production, all countries taking action, with developed countries taking the lead, taking
    into account the development and capabilities of developing countries

 12.4 By 2020, achieve the environmentally sound management of chemicals and all

    wastes throughout their life cycle, in accordance with agreed international frameworks,
    and significantly reduce their release to air, water and soil in order to minimize their
    adverse impacts on human health and the environment

 12.5 By 2030, substantially reduce waste generation through prevention, reduction,

    recycling and reuse

 12.6 Encourage companies, especially large and transnational companies, to adopt

    sustainable practices and to integrate sustainability information into their reporting cycle

 12.7 Promote public procurement practices that are sustainable, in accordance with

    national policies and priorities

 12.8 By 2030, ensure that people everywhere have the relevant information and

    awareness for sustainable development and lifestyles in harmony with nature

                                                                                                                3
 14.1 By 2025, prevent and significantly reduce marine pollution of all kinds, in particular

    from land-based activities, including marine debris and nutrient pollution

 14.3 Minimize and address the impacts of ocean acidification, including through

    enhanced scientific cooperation at all levels

 14.4 By 2020, effectively regulate harvesting and end overfishing, illegal, unreported and

    unregulated fishing and destructive fishing practices and implement science-based
    management plans, in order to restore fish stocks in the shortest time feasible, at least to
    levels that can produce maximum sustainable yield as determined by their biological
    characteristics

 14.5 By 2020, conserve at least 10 per cent of coastal and marine areas, consistent with

    national and international law and based on the best available scientific information

 14.6 By 2020, prohibit certain forms of fisheries subsidies which contribute to

    overcapacity and overfishing, eliminate subsidies that contribute to illegal, unreported
    and unregulated fishing and refrain from introducing new such subsidies, recognizing that
    appropriate and effective special and differential treatment for developing and least
    developed countries should be an integral part of the World Trade Organization fisheries
    subsidies negotiation

 15.1 By 2020, ensure the conservation, restoration and sustainable use of terrestrial and

    inland freshwater ecosystems and their services, in particular forests, wetlands,
    mountains and drylands, in line with obligations under international agreements

 15.3 By 2030, combat desertification, restore degraded land and soil, including land

    affected by desertification, drought and floods, and strive to achieve a land degradation-
    neutral world

 15.4 By 2030, ensure the conservation of mountain ecosystems, including their

    biodiversity, in order to enhance their capacity to provide benefits that are essential for
    sustainable development

 15.5 Take urgent and significant action to reduce the degradation of natural habitats, halt

    the loss of biodiversity and, by 2020, protect and prevent the extinction of threatened
    species

 15.6 Ensure fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising from the utilization of genetic

    resources and promote appropriate access to such resources

 15.7 Take urgent action to end poaching and trafficking of protected species of flora and

    fauna and address both demand and supply of illegal wildlife products

 15.8 By 2020, introduce measures to prevent the introduction and significantly reduce

    the impact of invasive alien species on land and water ecosystems and control or
    eradicate the priority species

 15.9 By 2020, integrate ecosystem and biodiversity values into national and local

    planning, development processes, poverty reduction strategies and accounts

 7.3 By 2030, double the global rate of improvement in energy efficiency
 8.4 Improve progressively, through 2030, global resource efficiency in consumption and

    production and endeavor to decouple economic growth from environmental

                                                                                                                4
              degradation, in accordance with the 10-year framework of programmes on sustainable
              consumption and production, with developed countries taking the lead

         8.9 By 2030, devise and implement policies to promote sustainable tourism that creates

              jobs and promotes local culture and products

         9.4 By 2030, upgrade infrastructure and retrofit industries to make them sustainable, with

              increased resource-use efficiency and greater adoption of clean and environmentally
              sound technologies and industrial processes, with all countries taking action in
              accordance with their respective capabilities

         9.5 Enhance scientific research, upgrade the technological capabilities of industrial

              sectors in all countries, in particular developing countries, including, by 2030, encouraging
              innovation and substantially increasing the number of research and development workers
              per 1 million people and public and private research and development spending

         10.6 Ensure enhanced representation and voice for developing countries in decision-

              making in global international economic and financial institutions in order to deliver more
              effective, credible, accountable and legitimate institutions

         10.7 Facilitate orderly, safe, regular and responsible migration and mobility of people,

              including through the implementation of planned and well-managed migration policies

         11.3 By 2030, enhance inclusive and sustainable urbanization and capacity for

              participatory, integrated and sustainable human settlement planning and management
              in all countries

         11.4 Strengthen efforts to protect and safeguard the world's cultural and natural heritage
         11.5 By 2030, significantly reduce the number of deaths and the number of people

              affected and substantially decrease the direct economic losses relative to global gross
              domestic product caused by disasters, including water-related disasters, with a focus on
              protecting the poor and people in vulnerable situations

         11.7 By 2030, provide universal access to safe, inclusive and accessible, green and public

              spaces, in particular for women and children, older persons and persons with disabilities

         16.8 Broaden and strengthen the participation of developing countries in the institutions

              of global governance

         16.9 By 2030, provide legal identity for all, including birth registration.

1. Gaps are particularly prominent with respect to Goals 12, 14 and 15 related to sustainable
    production and consumption; oceans, seas and marine resources; and terrestrial ecosystems,
    forests, land degradation and biodiversity, respectively. It is worth mentioning that goals 12 and
    15 are included among the 11 priority Goals for Liberia captured in the Buchanan Communiqué
    on the SDGs of November 2015.

2. The analysis shows that targets related to Goal 10 on inequality are prioritized under 16 of the
    38 sectors of the AFT used for the analysis. This is in part due to the AFT's focus on vulnerable
    groups such as persons with disabilities, youth, women (gender equality), persons living with HIV
    and AIDS, and children (child protection). But also by the emphasis on smallholder farmers or
    youth and women, etc. in pillar II of the AFT on economic transformation.

                                                                                                                          5
3. The assessment equally highlights a good coverage of Goal 16 on peaceful and inclusive societies.

4. Resilience and reducing vulnerabilities to shocks and disasters, including those induced by
    climate-extreme events (ADG target 1.5), are not integrated in the AFT though are part of the
    ESRP which defines strengthening resilience and reducing vulnerability as one of three foreseen
    strategies for economic stabilization and recovery. Going forward, it may be worth reflecting upon
    the importance of mainstreaming disaster risk reduction and resilience considerations as part of
    the national development planning process to strengthen the capacity of communities and the
    country as a whole to respond to crisis such as the EVD in future.

5. The integration of nutrition in AFT is limited (target 2.2 on ending all forms of malnutrition) with
    emphasis placed instead under the agriculture and food security sector, on the need for
    modernizing and enhancing productivity of the agriculture and fisheries sectors, including by
    strengthening smallholder agriculture. Revitalizing the agriculture sector is important is light of
    high levels of food insecurity in the country (less than half the population is food secure).
    Nevertheless, nutrition is equally important. According to the African Health Observatory2 42% of
    Liberian children aged under 5 years are stunted, increasing their risk of dying from normal
    childhood illness and risk of chronic illness later in life. The same source indicates a National
    Nutrition Policy (2009) and a National Nutrition and Food Security Strategy are available. Further
    exploration of this issue by reference to these sectoral policies and strategies and results of their
    implementation would be useful in the context of the next national development planning
    process and alignment to the SDGs.

6. AFT does not prioritize target 3.4 on reducing premature mortality from non-communicable
    diseases and promoting mental health and deficiencies. According to the World Health
    Organization3 non-communicable diseases currently account for an estimated 34% of death in the
    country. The same source indicates the country lacks operational plans, policies or strategies to
    address these diseases and risks factors. Given the relatively high rate of death associated to these
    diseases, it may be worth considering whether such gaps need to be covered in the next national
    development planning cycle. The African Health Observatory of the WHO indicates mental health
    though the subject of a national sector policy (2009) and part of the basic package of health
    services4 suffers from important implementation challenges.

7. Among the gaps exposed by the analysis, target 3.7 related to access to sexual and reproductive
    health­care services, including for family planning is worth given attention to. The fertility rate
    is high and increased from 5.2 birth per woman aged 15-49 in 2007 to 5.9 births per woman in
    2009. The country has a large share of youth population: 49% of the population is younger than

2 http://www.aho.afro.who.int/profiles_information/index.php/Liberia:Analytical_summary_-
_Food_safety_and_nutrition
3 World Health Organization (2014). Liberia. Non-communicable diseases (NCD) country profiles at
http://www.who.int/nmh/countries/lbr_en.pdf
4 http://www.aho.afro.who.int/profiles_information/index.php/Liberia:Analytical_summary_-_Non-
communicable_diseases_and_conditions

                                                                                                  6
    15 years old. On the other hand, Liberia's contraceptive prevalence rate is of 11.4% and unmet
    needs for family planning are high at 36%.5 Gender equality and women's empowerment are
    important to improve reproductive health as is access to a package of reproductive health
    services, including family planning.

8. The assessment shows that target 11.3 on inclusive and sustainable urbanization and capacity
    for human settlement planning and management is not integrated in AFT. This in in spite of the
    AFT recognizing that urbanization in Liberia ­partly as a consequence of the civil war- is larger
    than in other low income countries. According to UNHABITAT,6 more than 40% of Liberia's urban
    population now lives in the Greater Monrovia area and an estimated 70% of Monrovia's
    population currently lives in slum conditions as a consequence of unplanned urbanization. While
    the AFT defines targets for ensuring access to public housing for the poor and transport services,
    for instance, there is no reference to broader issues of urban planning. This is important to ensure
    that increasing urbanization goes hand in hand with infrastructure development, planning for
    service provision such as health and education, and avoiding environmental degradation related
    to slums proliferation and concomitant health and other risks.

9. Reference to fisheries and marine resources in the AFT are sparse though fisheries is one of the
    sectors identified in the AFT as growth sector and in the National Export Strategy as a driver for
    trade expansion. Among the gaps exposed by the alignment assessment is target 14.4 on
    regulating harvesting and end overfishing, illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing (IUU)
    practices. According to Liberia's 2008 Diagnostic Trade integration Study undertaken under the
    auspices of the Enhanced Integrated Framework, the fisheries sector is underdeveloped and
    suffers from important institutional weaknesses. The report specifically highlights the significant
    incidence of IUU practices7 which both undermine the resource base and government revenue
    necessary for development. Further analysis may be necessary to understand whether sectoral
    policies address this gap.

10. With respect to means of implementation (Goal 17), the assessment shows the Government of
    Liberia have made emphasis on domestic resource mobilization in the AFT acting in several fronts:
    from improving public financial management in general, to increasing government revenue from
    mineral and forest resource exploitation, including by enhancing transparency and monitoring of
    activities by firms in these sectors. Financing of SDGs is a critical consideration for Liberia given its
    limited fiscal space further undermined by the EVD crisis. The ESRP stresses the importance of
    securing on-going budget support financing to cover the shortfalls resulting from the EVD crisis.
    It also underlines the need for development partners to disburse committed funds to Liberia for
    USD 1.6 billion and finance additional infrastructure projects for USD 1.2 billion. These issues were
    discussed in the context of the International Ebola Recovery Conference held in July 2015 which
    led to pledges of USD 500 million to support the ESRP.

5 World Bank (2011), Liberia. Reproductive Health at a Glance, April 2011 at
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTPRH/Resources/376374-1303736328719/Liberia41811web.pdf
6 http://unhabitat.org/events/liberia-national-urban-forum-2015/
7 Liberia 2008 DTIS

                                                                                              7
11. In addition to domestic resource mobilization and ODA, the AFT seeks to create an enabling
    environment for private sector development as driver of growth and employment creation, and
    trade development, by strengthening value chains and increasing local value added. In this
    context FDI, access to regional and international markets, access to technology, etc. ­ all areas
    covered by different targets in Goal 17- are of relevance to Liberia. As the country defines its
    priorities for the next development planning cycle and implementation of the SDG an engagement
    strategy to mobilize the finance and partnerships to support the country's priorities would be
    useful.

12. The Key indicators for monitoring implementation of the AFT to a large extent seek data
    disaggregation by groups such as women and youth; and location ­i.e. urban/rural and per county
    where applicable.

13. Template 1 without being exhaustive, highlights missing inter-sectoral linkages resulting from the
    AFT assessment. Further analysis is needed inclusive of relevant sectoral policies and strategies
    to confirm or not these gaps and identify others not covered therein. Beyond the gap analysis, it
    will be very important, responding to the integrated nature of Agenda 2030 and the SDGs, to
    consider what is the best institutional framework to promote cross-sectoral collaboration
    throughout the development planning cycle - from situation assessment to prioritization,
    implementation of programmes and interventions, monitoring and evaluation, building on the
    national experience with the implementation of AFT and other sectoral policies and strategies.

                                                        ------

                                                                                                                          8
